- [Narrator] The British royal family we know today
are just one generation amongst a remarkable monarchy
spanning over 1,000 years.
But how did an ancestry that once ruled the lands
eventually forfeit power?
With over a millennium of bloody succession wars,
global conquests, betrayals,
and grand stone buildings still standing tall,
all the royal history has been documented and preserved.
With countless kings and queens,
each with their own stories,
this is The Entire History of the British Monarchy.
(ethereal music)
Our story doesn't begin with the Scots
or with the English for that matter,
but with a Saxon prince named Egbert III.
At the time of Egbert III's birth in 771 AD,
England did not exist.
Instead, the British Isles looked like this,
a patchwork of warring kingdoms
made up of Angles, Saxons, Jutes, and Britains,
all fighting one another
for control and influence over the dominion.
Born to Ealhmund, King of Kent
and grandson of Eafa, King of Wessex,
the young prince Egbert
had strong claims to both territories.
His father died when Egbert was 10,
and a bloody scramble for the crown ensued.
It eventually came to rest
on the head of Beorhtric of Mercia.
A young Egbert challenged Beorhtric's rule and lost.
Forced to take refuge in the nearby court of Mercia
and eventually sent into exile in Francia,
Egbert was forced to abide his time.
Learning from the French courts of Charlemagne
and gaining experience
as a military leader on the continent,
Egbert grew into a king
who was about to change the course of English history.
In 800 AD after the death of Beorhtric,
Egbert crossed the channel,
returning to the land of his father,
and made his claim to the throne of Wessex.
Despite overwhelming support in both Europe
and within the Wessex nobility,
Egbert's ascension was by no means easy.
Threats from nearby kingdoms were constant.
And after losing his brother-in-law
on the day of his ascension to an invading army of Mercians,
Egbert was finally crowned King of Wessex in 802 AD.
Immediately, he set about consolidating his power.
He took control of the kingdoms of Kent, Essex, Sussex,
and Cornwall, as well as large swathes of Wales.
Even the kingdom of Northumbria eventually submitted
to the crown of Wessex, placing all Anglo-Saxon kingdoms
in Britain under the direct and indirect rule
of Egbert of Wessex.
Well, almost all.
His old enemy, the kingdom of Mercia, was a different story.
The two sides had been locked
in a constant state of warfare for centuries,
with each kingdom trading territory and blood
as the years wore on.
King Egbert of Wessex would see brief success
driving the king of Mercia wheel off out of his lands,
but he was unable to hold them
and wheel off returned only a year later.
Despite this though, the Anglo-Saxon chronicles
remember Egbert favorably.
For his role in uniting the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of Britain,
they bestowed unto him the title of Bretwalda,
or Wide-Ruler of Britain.
And while he was never able to fully conquer
the Mercian crown,
his rule changed the landscape of Britain forever.
Egbert of Wessex set in motion a policy
of consolidation and expansion
that his offspring would continue to enforce
for the next 200 years,
eventually leading to the unification of Britain
and the birth of England.
But there's still a lot of miss before we get there.
(light music)
King Egbert of Wessex died in 839 AD
and was succeeded by his eldest son, Aethelwulf,
who soon faced a new threat, the Danes.
Adorned in animal skins
and brandishing axes stained with blood,
the Danish invasion officially began an 842 AD.
While Aethelwulf was victorious
at the Battle of Aclea in 851 AD,
driving the Danes back into the seas,
he knew that this was just the beginning.
The new threat worried the kingdoms of Britain so much
that it forced Mercia and Wessex
into an uneasy alliance with one another,
putting an end to an almost 300 year conflict.
(suspenseful music)
Aethelwulf was succeeded by his son, Aethelbald,
whose reign was short and unpopular,
especially amongst the clergy.
This was mainly because of the new king's decision
to marry his father's widow,
something that even at this time was considered weird.
After just four years of rule, Aethelbald died,
passing the crown of Wessex
onto his younger brother, Aethelberht.
(light music)
Like his father before him, Aethelberht too was threatened
by foreign invaders from the North.
Viking raids along the coast
led by Ragnar Lodbrok and his son Ivar the Boneless,
had been growing in violence in frequency,
with Viking forces even sacking
the Wessex capital of Winchester in 865 AD.
Aethelberht rallied his troops and drove the Vikings back,
but died of unknown causes that autumn,
leaving the throne to his younger brother, Aethelred I,
who was about to inherit an island
on the verge of a major upheaval.
(uplifting music)
The same year of Aethelred's ascension, 867 AD,
the Vikings captured and settled the town of York,
establishing the first major Danish foothold
on English soil.
Aethelred had no choice
but to meet the great heathen army in battle.
Together with his younger brother Alfred,
they gathered an army
and marched out to defeat their invaders.
The cautious King Aethelred was defeated
at the Battle of Reading in 871 AD,
but was saved by his younger brother
at the Battle of Ashdown the same year.
Impatient, as only the young are, Alfred took his army
while King Aethelred prayed
and met the Danes in open battle.
He pushed the Viking hoard back
and bought his brother's kingdom some time,
but the Danes rallied
and struck the armies of Wessex again,
securing victories at the battles of Basing and Merton.
Aethelred died from his wounds,
leaving the throne to his younger brother Alfred,
who now inherited a kingdom on the brink of collapse.
(dramatic music)
In 874 AD, the great heathen army
marched on the kingdom of Mercia,
defeating Burgred of Mercia
and forcing the king into exile.
With Mercia defeated,
all that stood between the northern invaders
and total control of England was Alfred
and the kingdom of Wessex.
As Danish forces closed in all around him,
Alfred was pushed back
and forced into a remote marsh in Somerset.
He'd been betrayed by his allies who now chose to negotiate
with the invaders rather than fight.
Total Danish control of Britain looked imminent,
but the young king had not given up hope.
He emerged from the marsh
and surprised the Danish army in Edington,
chasing the Danish king Guthrum
back to his base in Chippenham
and forcing the Danes into a siege.
Guthrum held out for two weeks
before he surrendered to Alfred's forces,
and Alfred was victorious.
The terms were simple.
Guthrum was to leave Wessex and receive a Christian baptism.
The Danish king obliged,
and after his baptism was solemnized at Wedmore,
he retreated to East Anglia,
leaving Alfred to consolidate his gains.
Victorious, Alfred took on a new name, Alfred the Great.
With the Viking threat tamed,
Alfred set about transforming Anglo-Saxon society
for the better.
He established fortified towns throughout his kingdom,
built schools, and encouraged the acquisition of knowledge.
There's even an unsubstantiated myth
that he founded Oxford University.
But perhaps his most important policy
was the establishment of Dane Law.
England was to be divided.
The south and east belonged to the Saxons,
and Saxon law applied.
While the north and west belonged to the Danes,
and thus were subject to Dane Law.
This divide is still seen culturally, politically,
and financially in Britain today.
Alfred brought Anglo-Saxon England into a golden age.
He tamed the Danish threat
and kickstarted a new age of Saxon rule
that permanently changed the landscape of Britain forever.
(suspenseful music)
Alfred the Great was succeeded
by his son, Edward the Elder, in 899 AD.
Edward was in many ways like his father,
learned, pious, and a keen military tactician.
His reign focused on two things,
improving the administration of his lands
and increased expansion both north and south.
He was able to capture the Viking capital of York,
but only held it for a year
before he was forced to abandon it.
He also successfully defeated the Viking presence
in southern England, and now either directly
or indirectly ruled over all the old kingdoms,
barring Northumbria, which was still under Viking control.
Edward the Elder died in 924 AD from wounds he received
while quashing a Mercian rebellion in Chester,
and passed his crown onto his son Athelstan.
(light music)
After consolidating his power at home,
Athelstan set his sights north
and did what his father could not.
He conquered the kingdom of Northumbria
and took control of the Viking capital of York,
conquering the last Viking territory on the island
and pushing the Danes into Scotland.
He continued his campaign into the Scottish territories,
and after heavy losses on both sides,
he emerged victorious at the Battle of Brunanburh,
forcing the Scottish king to pledge overlordship to him.
This made him the first true ruler
over all the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms in Britain,
with his control extending from the shores of Cornwall
up to the highlands of Scotland.
By uniting the Anglo-Saxons,
Athelstan formed the Kingdom of England,
and as thus remembered as the first real English king.
With the realm now firmly under his control,
King Athelstan continued the policies
and reforms of his grandfather, Alfred the Great.
He centralized government,
brought about massive legal reform in the realm,
and concerned himself with European politics
in a way his predecessors seldom had.
He died in 939 AD, passing the throne
onto his half brother, Edmund the Magnificent.
(gentle music)
Edmund's reign would be almost entirely focused
on keeping his half brother's kingdom together.
He faced continuous threats from the Danish
who had now settled north of the border.
Shortly after Edmund's ascension,
they revolted against the new king, retaking York
and mounting destructive raids on the Midlands.
But like his predecessor,
Edmund the Magnificent wasn't to be messed with.
Leading his army north, he briefly stopped
to quash a Welsh rebellion that had been brewing
since before Athelstan's death.
He then defeated the Danes at the siege of Leicester
and sent his armies into Scotland,
seeking revenge against the king of Strathclyde
for his decision to decide with a Danish
during the recapturing of York.
He'd opposed the king of Strathclyde
and installed Malcolm I of Scotland on the condition
that Edmund would have overlordship of the territory.
This gave Edmund control directly and indirectly
of the entire island of Great Britain.
But for all his successes,
Edmund the Magnificent could not escape a violent death.
In 946 AD while attending a Saint Augustine's Mass
in Gloucestershire, Edmund was attacked
and killed by a thief named Leofa
who the king had previously banished for his crimes.
Edmund the Magnificent was buried at Glastonbury Abbey
and the realms scrambled to find his successor.
(light music)
Since Edmund's two sons were too young to rule,
the burden of the crown fell to Edmund's brother, Eadred,
who reigned for nine years before succumbing
to an unknown intestinal illness in 955 AD.
Edmund's eldest son Eadwig was now 15
and took the crown as his own.
He decided to split the realm between himself
and his younger brother Edgar,
ruling everything south of the river Thames,
while Edgar ruled the North.
King Eadwig's reign was short, with the young king dying
just four years after his coronation.
He passed the Kingdom of England in its entirety
to his younger brother, Edgar the Peaceful in 959 AD.
His reign was, as the name might suggest,
considered a peaceful golden age where England was free
from external attacks and internal disorder.
He introduced a standardized coinage and was at the helm
of the English Benedictine religious reforms
that swept across the realm, but this peace did not last.
His death in 975 AD thrust England back
into a period of conflict and uncertainty.
(light music)
The throne was disrupted by Edgar's two remaining sons,
Edward the Martyr and Aethelred the Unready.
Edward successfully took the throne in 975 AD,
but was murdered just four years later in circumstances
not totally clear to us today.
His younger brother Aethelred soon took charge
at just 12 years old.
Before the young king had even a hair on his chin,
an old enemy reared from far in the north.
The Danes had returned
and set about raiding English territories again.
With every year, the threat grew more serious,
and soon the English king
could not afford to ignore them any longer.
He gathered his armies and march north,
but was eventually defeated at the Battle of Maldon.
Seeking a compromise, King Aethelred II was forced
to pay off the Danish king
and leave them to settle in the kingdom of Northumbria,
but as it turns out, the king was not content
to just let the invaders be.
A decade after his defeat,
he ordered the infamous St. Brice's Day massacre,
a brutal slaughtering of a Danish settlement
which had dire consequences to not only his rule,
but his entire family's place in history.
Hearing of the attack on his people,
King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark sailed to England,
forcing Aethelred to flee to Normandy in 1013 AD.
Sweyn Forkbeard ruled over England for just four weeks
before his sudden and mysterious death.
Seizing the opportunity,
Aethelred returned and quickly retook control of the crown.
Despite the brief Danish interruption,
Aethelred's 37 year reign
was the longest of any Anglo-Saxon king,
and it would become the last period of royal stability
until the 12th century almost 100 years later.
(bright music)
King Aethelred the Unready died in 1016 AD,
and the crown was passed onto his son, Edmund Ironside,
who, like so many of those before him,
was now forced to clean up the mess his father had made.
You see, unbeknownst to Edmund,
the Danish King Sweyn had a son, Canute the Great,
who had been amassing an army in Denmark
in preparing it to sail to England.
Just weeks after the death of his father
and with the coronation wine barely out of his system,
Edmund was forced to meet Canute and the Danes in battle.
He was unsuccessful.
With Edmund wounded, the two reached an agreement.
Edmund Ironside was to rule Wessex,
while Canute could have the rest of the country.
This was October 30th.
By November 18th, Edmund was dead
and Canute assumed kingship over the entire realm.
After 214 years of hegemony, the House of Wessex
had officially lost its control over England,
ruling uninterrupted since Egbert III in 802 AD.
1016 would prove to be the dawn of a new age
on the British Isles, the Age of Danes.
(bright music)
After centuries of Danish activity on the island,
a Danish king now sat on the English throne.
Canute the Great was crowned in 1016 AD
and wasted no time proving he was an astute leader
and capable king.
He understood that to rule the English
he would need their help.
He appointed English councilors and clergymen,
choosing to uphold the traditional customs
and values of the land he'd inherited
rather than to suppress them.
He married the widow of Aethelred the Unready
and allied himself closely to the church,
all of which helped Canute cement his legitimacy in 1017 AD.
In 1018, he was crowned king of Denmark
and later conquered Sweden, uniting the three kingdoms
to create the North Sea Alliance.
Medieval historians look back on Canute's reign favorably.
His presence brought stability to England
and allowed the realm to flourish
now that the threat of Viking raiders had been eliminated.
He died in 1035 AD,
and the crown was to be given to his son, Harold Harefoot.
(ethereal music)
Harold did not bend the first choice for succession,
but with his older brother Hardicnut stuck in Norway
dealing with a Swedish rebellion, therefore, it was decided
that Harold would be appointed king instead.
This was not a popular decision
and many in the realm opposed it,
most notably Godwin the Earl of Wessex
and Emma of Normandy, Harold's stepmother
and the widow of Aethelred the Unready.
She'd had two other sons while with Aethelred,
both of whom had been exiled to Normandy
after the Danish conquest.
But now with Hardicnut absent
and Harold struggling to consolidate his power,
she called on them to return to England
and take back their father's throne.
Alfred the Noble and Edward the Confessor
sailed across the channel with a large army
and sought support from the House of Wessex.
But Godwin, who'd initially opposed Harold's claim
to the throne, betrayed the young princes
and seized Alfred the Noble
with the aim of delivering him to Harold Harefoot.
Fearing he would be next,
Edward the Confessor fled back to Normandy,
this time taking his mother with him to safety.
During his captivity, Alfred the Noble was blinded
and eventually succumbed to his wounds in 1036 AD.
Harold would rule for just four more years
before dying in 1040.
(light music)
Hearing of his half brother's passing,
Hardicnut returned from Scandinavia
and crowned himself king of England that same year.
But like his brother, his reign too would be short,
and he died in 1042 AD from an unknown illness.
He had no sons, and during the last years of his life,
perhaps encouraged by his mother, Emma of Normandy,
he called this half brother Edward the Confessor
back from exile and named him as his heir.
King Hardicnut's passing would mark the last time a Dane sat
on the English throne.
(bright music)
With Edward now on the throne,
England was once again ruled by an Anglo-Saxon king,
except Edward was only really Anglo-Saxon by blood.
He'd spent 25 years of his life in exile in Normandy,
and as a result, had an extremely Norman outlook on things.
He appointed Norman councilors and Norman church leaders
and opted to speak French as opposed to old English.
He is best remembered as the founder of Westminster Abbey,
still a major landmark in use in London today.
As his life drew to an end and with no sons to succeed him,
Edward was expected to choose an heir.
He was left with two options, Harold Godwinson,
a prominent earl of Wessex, and William, Duke of Normandy.
Choosing Harold made more political sense.
He was Anglo-Saxon and came from a prominent family
with ties to both the court of King Edward the Confessor
and the former Danish king, Canute the Great.
Meanwhile, William had been an aide to Edward
during his exile in Normandy
and was related to the Anglo-Saxon king
through Emma of Normandy, who was his aunt.
The issues that arose from Edward the Confessor's succession
was that it wasn't clear what the king had wanted.
There are rumors that he'd promised the throne to William,
but those claims are unsupported.
In 1065 AD, Edward the Confessor
slipped suddenly into a coma,
never clarifying who was to take over the English crown.
Edward died on the 5th of January, 1066.
A day later, Harold was crowned king of England
at the newly built Westminster Abbey.
Upon hearing the news of Harold's ascension,
William of Normandy was outraged
and began preparing to invade the island.
What followed was a brief period of warfare
that was about to shape England forever.
(energetic music)
King Harold found himself in an unfavorable position.
He knew of William's invasion force
and gathered his armies along the coast,
expecting the Norman duke to set sail soon
after he had been crowned.
But William didn't.
Bad weather made the channel too rough to sail across,
and William was forced to postpone his invasion
by several months.
Back in England and with provisions starting to run out,
Harold was forced to disband his army and return to London.
That same day on the 8th of September, 1066,
a new threat appeared, only this time far up north.
Harold Hardrada, King of Norway, had arrived in Northumbria,
and defeated the English earls
in charge of protecting the northern kingdoms.
Harold had no choice but to react.
He hastily regrouped his army
and began a forced march north of nearly 400 kilometers
to meet the Viking invaders.
It took four days for King Harold and his men
to reach modern day Yorkshire, but on the 25th of September,
they faced off against the Norwegian army
at the Battle of Stamford Bridge.
Just outside the city of York,
the English army clashed with the Norse invaders.
Hardrada was killed and Harold emerged victorious,
stopping the invasion dead in its tracks.
But Harold had little time to rest.
Just two days after his victory at Stamford Bridge,
word reached the king that the Norman invasion fleet
had finally set sail for England.
He gathered what many he had left
and began the 400 kilometer march back
to the English capital.
Meanwhile, William of Normandy
and around 7,000 men landed at Pevensey Bay in East Sussex
and quickly took control
of the old Roman fortifications nearby.
It took King Harold and his army a week
to reach the southern English coast,
and Harold hoped his speech would catch William
and his men by surprise.
But Norman scouts had spotted Harald's army moving down
and warned William of the king's arrival.
On October 14th, 1066, a date forever etched
in the annals of British history, the two armies clashed.
The battle began at 9:00 AM and lasted the entire day.
The English shield walls initially stood strong,
surprising the Norman duke and forcing him back,
but William had come prepared.
While Harold had only foot soldiers,
the Norman duke had brought with him cavalry
and archers to supplement his main force.
The Norman army feigned a retreat,
which prompted the English troops to rush forward.
This allowed the Norman cavalryman
to route the disorganized English foot soldiers
and slaughter them where they stood.
Harold, the last Anglo-Saxon king of England,
was killed by an arrow which struck him in the eye.
Harold's mother reportedly begged William
for her son's body back, offering to pay his weight in gold
for custody of her son's corpse.
But William refused.
Legend has it he threw the body into the ocean,
allowing the waves of the English Channel
to swallow the Saxon king, never to be seen again.
William of Normandy was victorious.
He marched on London,
burning his way through southern England
and forcing lords to swear fealty to him as he went.
He was crowned on Christmas Day, 1066,
marking the beginning of the Norman age of England.
His ascension to the English throne
earned the Norman duke a new name, William the Conqueror.
(suspenseful music)
As king by conquest,
William now faced the unenviable challenge
of consolidating his power.
He brutally punished those who had stood against him
by confiscating their lands, removing their royal titles
and executing anyone he deemed a threat to his rule.
Families that had remained neutral during the invasion
or were quick to pledge their support to William after it
were rewarded and allowed to continue operating
as they had before.
Some were even allowed to marry into the new royal family.
But a change in leadership
was not all William brought with him.
One of his most enduring policies was the construction
of motte-and-bailey castles throughout his kingdom.
Initially made from wood and later rebuilt with stone,
these fortifications became the landmark feature
of William's rule in England.
From Pevensey where he first landed
to as far north as modern day Newcastle,
these buildings were a sign of William's strength
and influence over the land.
Historians estimate that around 500
of these castles were built
within the first 20 years of Norman rule alone,
and they gave William and those loyal to him a position
from which to defend themselves
against revolts and usurpers, of which there were many.
Williams's first test came when his former ally Eustace,
the Count of Boulogne, rebelled at Dover.
Unhappy with his spoils of the conquest,
he rallied local troops against the king
and attempted to take Dover Castle,
but he failed and was forced to return the land he had won.
Next, the king was faced with a number
of English rebellions further inland.
There was Eadric the Wild in Wessex, as well as Gytha,
mother of Harold Godwinson,
organizing revolts as south as Exeter.
William dealt with those rebellions swiftly
and with relatively little bloodshed.
But in 1069 AD, the north rose up in revolt
and William responded in what would later be known
as the Harrying of the North.
It was a put down so brutal that it left the areas of York
and Durham underpopulated for centuries after,
but his show of force had done its job.
England was now firmly in his control.
With this stability, the king felt confident enough
to travel between England
and the continent with increasing frequency.
After 1072, he gave up making the journey
and spent the majority of his time in Normandy,
leaving England to be ruled
by his half-brother Odo of Bayeux
and his wife Matilda of Flanders.
It was during this time that the first ever national census
was conducted in England.
The dramatically named Doomsday Book
was in effect a royal survey of all the lands in England
simply for administrative and tax purposes.
Its name derives from the Christian Day of Judgment.
And the aim of the project was to streamline
and regulate tax collection in the realm.
Its historical relevance cannot be understated,
as it gave historians an incredibly detailed look
into what life was like at the time of the Norman Invasion,
and it currently lives
in the National Archives at Kew in London.
A year after the book was completed,
on the 9th of September, 1087 AD,
William the Conqueror died of dysentery
while on expedition in France.
As was the custom of the time,
he divided his properties between his three living sons.
Robert got Normandy, William got England,
and Henry, Henry got money.
(foreboding music)
While the new king William
may have inherited his father's lands and name,
he had unfortunately inherited little else.
Crowned king a month after his father's death,
he quickly established himself as an unpopular,
greedy, and self-centered ruler.
He was a poor administrator
who frequently angered the church and provoked his nobility
with an unpredictable temperament and unyielding attitude.
It's perhaps no surprise then that after 13 years of rule,
King William II met his end during a hunting accident.
The details of which aren't totally clear,
but it is reported that William stepped
in front of a stray arrow, dying of his wounds on the spot.
The man who shot the arrow, William Tirel,
fled after giving his account of the ordeal.
(light music)
With King William II dead, the throne was to be passed
onto his older brother, Robert, Duke of Normandy,
but Henry, the youngest of the three, had other ideas.
With Robert busy on the continent
ruling his Duke of Normandy,
Henry took control of the royal treasury in London
and proclaimed himself king of England in 1100 AD.
Robert did eventually challenge his younger brother
for the English throne, but King Henry was victorious
at the Battle of Tinchebray in 1106.
Defeated, Robert was stripped of his dukedom
and would spend the rest of his life in prison.
Thankfully for England, Henry I turned out
to be a much better ruler than his brother before him.
He successfully expanded royal administration
throughout the realm and further solidified the rule of law.
He set up the Court of the Exchequer
to directly handle all financial matters,
something which greatly improved the processes
of collecting taxes and granting charters.
He ruled for 35 long, peaceful and prosperous years
during a time of great social
and political change on the island.
Many of the administrators
King Henry had appointed were new men,
obscure, untitled subjects who had risen through the ranks
through sheer brilliance and ability
and not simply because of their names.
But tragedy struck Henry during his twilight years.
His son and eventual heir to the English throne,
William Adelin, died in the wreck of the White Ship
while returning from France.
The widower Henry was forced to remarry
in the hopes of having another son.
When it became clear Henry would not bear another son,
he decided to name his daughter Matilda
as his successor to the throne.
This was an unprecedented move,
and while many barons publicly swore fealty
to the future empress, privately they had other ideas.
King Henry I died in 1135 AD
believing that he had solved the issue of succession.
Immediately, however, the barons of England
abandoned the dead king's wishes
in favor of a different claimant, Henry's nephew,
Stephen of Blois.
You see, the English nobility weren't keen
on the idea of a woman ruling the country.
English society believed a woman
simply couldn't rule as effectively as a man.
Patriarchal biases aside, Stephen of Blois
was a well-known and well-liked figure
within the Anglo-Saxon upper class.
He was respected, well-mannered, decisive,
and best of all, wealthy,
traits that made him an attractive prospect
to put on the English throne.
Matilda meanwhile was stubborn, arrogant,
and because she had been married off at a young age
to the holy Roman emperor
and therefore spent her life away from England,
she was considered by many a foreigner.
What followed was a period of English history
that later came to be known as the anarchy.
(foreboding music)
The news of King Henry's death
reached Stephen of Blois first, and he crossed the channel
and crown himself king in 1135 AD,
arguing that the stability of the land took precedence
over any earlier commitments
to support Matilda as Henry's heir.
Matilda, who now was married to the Count of Anjou,
was still in Europe
and news of her father's passing was slow to reach her.
As a result, King Stephen enjoyed an early period of ruling
that was free of turmoil and challenge.
When news reached Matilda of Stephen's usurpation,
she was furious.
In 1139, she crossed the channel
and traveled to the court of her half-brother,
Robert, the Earl of Gloucester,
seeking his support against the usurper king.
Robert obliged.
Trouble began in 1141 when the king's forces
met Robert's army at the Battle of Lincoln.
King Stephen is said to have fought bravely
but was overwhelmed by Robert's men.
The captured king was then taken to speak with Matilda.
She immediately imprisoned Stephen at Bristol Castle
and set out for London with one aim in mind, her coronation,
but her attempts at becoming queen were soon halted.
She faced bitter opposition from the crowds
that had gathered in the capital.
These were not soldiers, but ordinary citizens.
Forced to retreat, her half brother Robert was captured
during the route of Winchester,
and only by releasing King Stephen
did Empress Matilda secure her half brother's safety.
With Stephen free once again, the fighting continued.
Empress Matilda was herself captured at the town of Devizes,
but managed to slip away from the king's men
by pretending to be a corpse on a cart.
She was again captured and this time held at Oxford Castle,
but Matilda mounted another daring escape,
lowering herself from the castle walls on a rope
during a snowstorm.
Wearing white so as the camouflage herself,
the empress traverse the bitter cold
and made her way to the town of Wallingford by night,
making sure to avoid detection
from hastily formed search parties that hoped to find her.
The war soon turned into a stalemate
as neither side could claim
they controlled much of anything.
In 1153, Matilda's son, Henry, landed in England
and began building his own alliances with power barons
to support his mother's claim to the throne.
But Empress Matilda had grown tired of the fighting
and by now had retreated to Normandy,
passing her claim solely onto her son.
King Stephen was in a similar position
with his rule undermined by the constant fighting,
so he agreed to the Treaty of Westminster.
It stated that King Stephen would remain king for life,
and then Henry, the lawful heir,
would succeed him as king of England upon his death.
As it turns out, Stephen only lived for another year
and died in 1154 AD, passing the English throne to Henry.
From the ashes of the civil war,
England was reborn under a new family,
one that would eventually rule over the island
for almost half a millennia,
introducing the Plantagenets.
(uplifting music)
Henry II was crowned king of England
on the 19th of December, 1154 AD,
and immediately set about fixing his kingdom.
18 years of civil war had taken its toll,
and the realm his grandfather had ruled over
less than a lifetime ago was now unrecognizable.
The treasury was virtually empty,
royal administration was almost non-existent,
and local lords had slowly wrestled power away
from the crown, weakening its influence in the realm.
Henry began by restoring the power of royal administrations,
as well as reestablishing English hegemony over Wales.
He raised unlicensed castles
that had sprung up during the anarchy,
and reclaimed many of the rights
and powers the crown had lost
during the reign of King Stephen.
Next, Henry focused on restoring the crown's finances.
The war had disrupted almost
all the king's traditional sources of income,
and as a result, Henry inherited a kingdom
that had lost an estimated 46% of its funding.
Faced with an administrative nightmare,
the king needed help.
He was soon introduced to a cleric from London
who had earned a reputation
as an astute and capable administrator.
His name was Thomas Becket.
Ruthlessly efficient and brilliant at this post,
Becket was appointed lord chancellor in 1155,
giving him direct control
over the king's sources of revenue.
Becket was successful at his new post,
and King Henry had a lot of admiration for the chancellor.
As a new man, Becket championed the idea
set forward by Henry's grandfather,
that of promotion through ability and not title,
and even beyond this, the two men quickly became friends.
The king even sent his son Henry
to live in the Becket household as a young boy,
highlighting just how close the two families really were.
So when the archbishop of Canterbury died,
Henry saw a golden opportunity.
Wanting to reassert his rights over the church in England,
which had been growing increasingly powerful
in recent years, King Henry II
encouraged a reluctant Thomas Becket
to take up the position of archbishop.
It was a win-win for Henry.
Becket was a powerful chancellor,
and his new position as archbishop
would weaken him politically,
meaning Becket would have to rely more
on King Henry for support.
Moreover, Henry assumed his old friend
would act in the crown's best interest,
weakening the church's growing influence
over the Kingdom of England, but he was wrong.
Almost immediately after his ordination in 1162 AD,
Thomas Becket changed.
He abandoned his links to the royal family
and fashion himself as a new protector of religious rights.
Henry's plan had backfired enormously.
Their friendship did little to stop them
from clashing on a number of issues,
mainly the question of the supremacy
of ecclesiastical courts.
Put simply, during Henry's reign,
clergy members could only be tried
for their crimes in church courts.
The king didn't like this, as it made the crown appear weak
and subservient, implying that the church
and its clergy were above royal ordinance.
Add to this the fact that a huge portion
of England's administrative body was made up of clergymen,
and Henry was anxious to wrestle power back from the church.
He argued that criminalist clerks
should be tried in royal courts instead.
Becket disagreed.
This enraged King Henry II who was known for having a wild
and unpredictable temperament.
Fearing for his life, Archbishop Becket fled to France,
where the pope was forced to intervene,
mediating a fragile peace between the old friends.
Upon his return, Becket immediately angered Henry
by excommunicating the bishops who had supported the king
during the archbishop's exile.
Henry flew into another rage, and four nights,
perhaps hoping to curry favor from the king,
rode to Canterbury and killed Becket
on the steps of his altar where he stood.
It was a shocking move
and one that Henry came to deeply regret.
Filled with remorse,
King Henry walked to Canterbury Cathedral
in sackcloth and ashes,
allowing himself to be whipped by the monks there.
Becket was martyred
and the power of the church grew as a consequence.
Henry's own demise would eventually come
at the hands of his three sons.
In 1173, the heir to the English throne,
young Henry rebelled against his father.
Joined by his two brothers, Richard and Geoffrey,
as well as several European states, the Great Revolt began,
and King Henry II was forced to meet the rebels in battle.
The revolt was only stopped
thanks to Henry's talented local commanders,
many of whom were new men appointed for their loyalty
and administrative skill.
Young Henry and Geoffrey led another revolt
a decade later in 1183, but they were, again, unsuccessful
and died a few years after.
Philip II, King of France,
swayed a neutral Richard to his side,
and together they led one last revolt
against King Henry II of England.
With his army defeated,
the king retreated to his castle in Anjou
where he died from a bleeding ulcer shortly after in 1189.
Having forced his father off the throne,
Richard prepped himself to take over.
(gentle music)
Richard I was crowned king at Westminster Abbey
on the 3rd of September, 1198.
Fondly remembered an English history
as Richard the Lionheart for his bravery
and skill in battle, Richard's rule is unique,
as he spent the majority of it abroad
fighting in what would later be known as the Third Crusades.
In fact, King Richard spent just 10 months in England
before leaving to join Philip II of France on his crusade
to liberate Jerusalem from Muslim invaders.
Richard proved himself to be a brilliant military strategist
and he fought cruelly and decisively
as he led his army deep into the Lavant.
His rivalry with Muslim commander Saladin
became the stuff of a legend,
and the crusaders were able to recapture
a sizable portion of their territory back.
But as a result, England quickly became an afterthought
to King Richard.
He used the realm mainly to finance his wars
in the Middle East.
After failing to retake Jerusalem,
King Richard was captured by Leopold of Austria,
a personal enemy of the English king, and held for ransom.
John, the youngest of Henry II's children
and brother of Richard,
had been left an administrative charge of the realm.
When news reached him of his brother's capture,
he was hesitant to pay the 60,000 pound ransom.
With help from the archbishop of Canterbury
and his mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine,
King Richard's ransom was paid and he was free once more.
But Richard the Lionheart died as he lived, fighting.
Struck by a crossbow bolt in France,
the wound quickly turned gangrenous,
and it was apparent to all that the king wouldn't make it.
Richard reportedly asked to have the crossbow man
brought before him and was surprised
when a boy was thrown at his feet.
The child said King Richard
had killed his father and brother
and that he had intended to kill Richard in revenge.
He expected to be executed, but in one final act of mercy,
Richard the Lionheart forgave him saying,
"Live on, and by my bounty, behold the light of day."
Richard died in his mother's arms on the 6th of April, 1199.
Chroniclers of this time said this of the king's death,
"The lion by the ant was slain."
(light music)
With his brother now dead,
John was crowned king of England in 1199 AD.
Like his older brother before him,
John too was given a nickname,
although one far less romantic.
He was called John Lackland or lack-of-land,
as he was not expected to inherit any significant lands
upon his father's death.
But as fate would have it,
as the youngest of Henry II's four sons,
John had not been involved
in any of the wars against his father
and had therefore been given lands in Ireland and France
as a thank you for his loyalty.
Unfortunately, though, this was about as good
as it got for King John.
While Richard the Lionheart was an absent but popular king,
John was the complete opposite.
He was a poor administrator, a greedy statesman,
and a terrible fighter whose over-involvement in ruling
led to a sharp decline in the power of the English crown.
In 1204, he lost all his family's lands on the continent,
severing the aristocracy of Normandy from England
for the first time
since William the Conqueror's ascension in 1066.
He was briefly excommunicated in 1209 by Pope Innocent III
after an argument with his clergy,
and was becoming increasingly unpopular
with the barons of England
for his poor leadership and decision-making.
After failing to recapture his territories of Normandy,
King John was forced to return to England
and face a powerful rebellion from his barons.
Unhappy with the king's new fiscal policies
and demanding that their righteous nobility be respected,
they forced the king in signing the great document
or the Magna Carta in 1215 AD.
The English crown changed forever that day,
as the king agreed to be bound by common law and tradition,
especially where it affected the rights
and privileges of the nobility.
It essentially put the crown directly under the rule of law,
as opposed to the other way around
as it had been since England was founded.
Its impact was astronomical, although not immediate.
While it was nothing more than a power grab
by the barons of England,
it eventually went on to form the basis
of the English constitution,
and included several clauses that were later interpreted
as definitions of democratic freedom
and the rights of an individual under common law.
King John had hoped that by signing the Magna Carta,
he could appease his nobility
and stop a war from breaking out in the kingdom.
But once again, he was wrong.
Still unhappy with King John's rule,
the First Barons' War ignited in England in 1215.
But despite backing from the King of France,
the English barons were unable
to score any decisive victories over King John and his men,
and the war quickly became a stalemate.
While on campaign, King John died of dysentery
he'd contracted while overindulging on peaches,
a fitting death perhaps.
As a result, the throne was passed onto his son, Henry,
who now had the unpleasant task of finishing
what his father had started.
(uplifting music)
At just nine years of age,
Henry III was crowned king of England on October 28th, 1216.
Inheriting a kingdom on fire,
the new King Henry was faced with a challenge
of ending the First Barons' War.
The king's army was led by William Marshal,
1st Earl of Pembrokeshire
and servant to five English rulers before him.
He was a brilliant commander
and successfully defeated the baron army
at the Battle of Lincoln
and the Battle of Sandwich that same year.
With the barons defeated,
they now had to answer to their new king.
Henry showed great diplomacy
and maturity by promising to abide by the Magna Carta,
agreeing to limit his royal power
and protect the rights of the nobility.
With the rebellion quashed, Henry now turned his attention
to repairing his kingdom.
With the help of able statesmen and administrators,
the next few years of King Henry's reign
focused on regaining royal control
that had been lost during the war.
In 1230 AD, he had secured his power,
and now well into adulthood,
he said his sights on his father's greatest shame,
their provinces in France.
The English crown had never fully recovered
from losing its grip on the edge of an empire,
and King Henry III sought to fix that.
He prepared an invasion fleet,
planning to take the territories by force,
and reestablish English control
over land he deemed his birthright,
but the invasion was a disaster.
Perhaps on the advice of the first earl of Kent
who had been ruling the realm on behalf of the young king
while he was still coming of age,
Henry avoided meeting the French in open battle
and instead marched his troops across the countryside,
forcing local barons and lords to pay homage to him.
Some did, some didn't, and it was a pointless venture
that didn't really mean much
for English control in the region.
Eventually, Henry was forced to return to England
having achieved nothing.
As soon as Henry and his troops left France,
those barons who had pledged themselves to him
went right back to supporting the French king.
The invasion had been a costly fiasco
that made Henry extremely unpopular amongst his nobility.
Hubert, 1st Earl of Kent,
had now fallen out of favor with the king,
and upon their return to England, Henry dismissed him,
eventually imprisoning Hubert in the Tower of London,
and the man chosen to replace him was no better.
Peter des Roches took over as the king's justiciar
and immediately set about reversing the policies
of his predecessor.
He stripped his enemies of land and wealth,
circumventing the royal courts,
and angering the nobility who believed
that their rights were being infringed upon once again.
Richard Marshal, the son of William Marshal,
who had led the royal army in the First Barons' War,
began to amass troops,
only this time in support of the English barons.
They argued that the king had again failed
to protect their rights as outlined in the Magna Carta,
and thus a new civil war broke out.
Unable to gain a clear military advantage
against the rebels and with tension in France growing,
King Henry had no choice.
He agreed to the dismissal of Peter des Roches
and submitted fully to the rebels' demands.
King Henry had learned his lesson.
Never again was England ruled through senior ministers,
and the king now chose to administer the realm personally.
The only problem was that Henry
was not a good administrator.
He filled the church with absentee Italian appointees
and much of the civil offices with French bureaucrats,
actions which unsurprisingly angered the nobility
of England once more.
This led to the barons to once again take action
against the king.
He was forced into signing the provisions of Oxford,
a document which gave barons the legal right
to veto the king's decisions.
Although initially supportive,
King Henry tried to back out of the deal,
which led to the third civil war of his reign.
Led by Simon de Montfort, Henry's brother-in-law,
the rebel army successfully captured King Henry
at the Battle of Lewis in 1265.
With the king now at his mercy,
Simon called the first English parliament into action.
From the French word for talk or parle,
he summoned two knights from each shire
and two burgesses from each borough for a discussion.
The men talked and created a new system of government
on the island that is still in use in England today.
King Henry's eldest son, Edward Longshanks,
so named for his lanky build,
had been captured alongside his father
at the Battle of Lewis.
Shortly after the first parliamentary discussion,
Edward escaped, and within a few short months,
he had defeated Simon at the Battle of Evesham in 1265.
The Second Barons' War ended shortly after,
and Edward Longshanks left England with his father,
King Henry, once again on the English throne.
In 1275, King Henry III announced his intention
to embark on the crusades alongside his son,
but died just a few months later.
Edward was recalled from the continent
and slowly made his way back to the English shores.
(gentle music)
Landing on the island in 1274,
Edward Longshanks was crowned at Westminster Abbey
shortly after becoming king of England,
inheriting an island that had suffered
through three major insurrections in the last 56 years.
King Edward I had his work cut out for him.
He immediately set about reforming royal administration
and reinforcing common law, writing a series of statutes
that regulated criminal and property law in the realm.
Edward had also learned from his father's mistakes
and was more supportive of the demands of his nobility.
He regularly convened with knights and townspeople alike
on matters that affected them
and quickly proved to be an able and just ruler.
But despite his focus on repairing England domestically,
King Edward could not help
but be drawn into foreign conflicts.
The first was a revolt in Wales
led by a Welsh chief named Llywelyn in 1282.
Here the royal army came face-to-face
with the brutal efficiency of the Welsh longbowman,
and despite taking heavy losses,
they subdued the rebel threat.
In an attempt to exert more control over the region,
King Edward constructed a series of castles
in the Welsh territory
and increased royal presence in the region.
His son, Edward, was born in Wales in 1284
and was soon after named Prince of Wales,
a title that the heir to the English throne
still wears to this day.
In 1291, another foreign conflict called his attention,
this time at the northern border.
Asked to arbitrate between three rival claimants
to the Scottish throne, Edward chose to crown John Balliol.
The only problem was that John Balliol
had previously paid homage to the English king,
thus ruining any impartiality Edward was supposed to have.
This angered the lords of Scotland,
who in turn allied themselves with France,
leaving England threatened on all sides.
King Edward then retaliated.
Claiming feudal suzerainty over Scotland,
he marched his army north and invaded,
defeating Balliol in 1296
and taking the Scottish crown for himself.
He also took the Stone of Scone,
an important relic of Scottish nobility
where all Scottish kings were crowned upon.
The stone is still used to crown British monarchs today
and currently resides at Westminster Abbey in London.
For his actions in Scotland,
King Edward earned himself a new nickname.
Edward Longshanks had become Edward the Hammer of Scots.
Back in England, Edward was overseeing
a rapidly transforming English government.
He encouraged petitions to parliament,
with council sitting much more frequently
than they had previously,
and he continued to clarify the responsibilities
of the different courts.
Criminal and crown cases were handled
by the Court of King's Bench.
The Court of the Exchequer dealt with the royal finance,
and the Court of Common Plea
handled more of the day-to-day cases between subjects.
From these roots, a new profession sprouted, lawyers.
Needing to keep his new courts running smoothly,
he took the profession of law away from the clergy
and formed a new social class of educated young men
whose job was to learn the law
away from the influence of the church.
This led to the establishment of the Inns of Court,
grade mansions where students and barristers lived together.
The barristers taught the students English common law,
along with necessary social skills,
such as music and dancing.
These Inns of Court also set the precedent
for other collegiate systems around the country.
It was during King Edwards reign
that the academic system we know today
as Oxford University was founded,
building on the earlier schools established
by Alfred the Great over 200 years before.
King Edward I first died of dysentery in 1307
while fighting the Scottish up north.
There is a rumor that on his deathbed,
Edward wished for his bones to be taken with the army
while they continued their fight into Scotland.
Another rumor claims that Edward wished for his heart
to accompany the next crusaders
as they marched into the holy land once more.
Regardless, what these stories show
is that Edward very much considered himself a warrior king.
While he was a successful military commander,
it was his administrative actions
that had the biggest impact on England as a whole.
The introduction of lawyers
mingled with the burgeoning merchant class
to form a proto middle class,
where before there had been none,
parliament was strengthened
and legitimized during his reign.
And despite his war-like tendencies,
King Edward's reign was peaceful and prosperous
for the average Englishman.
(light music)
King Edward I was succeeded by his son, Edward II,
who was crowned in 1307 at Westminster Abbey.
While his father had immediately launched
into fixing the realm he had inherited,
Edward II had no need to.
His father's kingdom was flourishing,
bolstered by great social changes
and the newly inherited Scottish crown.
It was a stable territory that was emerging
as one of the most powerful kingdoms in all of Europe.
But despite its power and prestige,
the new king Edward appeared
to almost resent the English crown
that now rested on his head.
He grew bored of his royal responsibilities
and quickly turned his attention
towards other pursuits, young men.
The first of these deep infatuations
the king would come to have was with Piers Gaveston.
Gaveston was arrogant and well aware of his position
as the king's favorite,
abusing his power and coming to blows
with many of the other barons of England.
He was a close companion to the king,
accompanying him everywhere,
but this wasn't well received by everyone.
Soon, Gaveston's behavior angered the French royal family,
to whom Edward II had married into through his wife,
Isabella of France.
With pressure mounting from both his nobility
and the French crown,
King Edward II was forced to exile Piers Gaveston,
but this didn't last long.
By 1307, Gaveston was back in England
and once again at the king's side.
Parliament met in 1308 with the king
eager to discuss potential government reform,
but the barons were unwilling to proceed
until the issue of Gaveston had been dealt with.
The king was initially dismissive
and a violent outcome seemed inevitable.
But after the archbishop of Canterbury
threatened to have Gaveston excommunicated,
Edward miraculously yielded.
Gaveston was to be sent to Aquitaine,
away from England for good.
Unsurprisingly, though, this did not last.
The king once again recalled Gaveston,
angering the barons and sparking an insurrection.
After a period of cat and mouse
between the king and the armies of his nobility,
Gaveston was eventually captured at Scarborough Castle
and taken to Warwick where he was tried as a traitor.
Gaveston was beheaded on the authority
of the earl of Lancaster.
The king was reportedly inconsolable.
Still reeling from the death of his friend,
Edward was decisively defeated
at the Battle of Bannockburn by Robert the Bruce,
and after just 18 years of English rule,
Scotland gained its independence once more in 1314.
However, the king tempered his foreign losses
with a new favorite, Hugh Le Despenser.
Like with Gaveston before,
Despenser and his family grew increasingly powerful
as King Edward's favorites,
but the barons of England had had enough.
A fresh civil war broke out,
which saw an army led by the Earl of Lancaster,
Gaveston's killer, face off against the crown
and her royal forces.
After five years of bloodshed,
King Edward II emerged victorious.
The Earl of Lancaster got a taste of his own medicine
and was beheaded at Pontefract Castle in 1326.
The Despenser clan, whose power had been growing
even before the war,
now saw their influence skyrocket across England.
With the barons defeated,
Isabella was once again forced to step in.
With backing from the French crown,
Queen Isabella raised an army
and marched against her husband.
Aided by her longtime lover, Roger Mortimer,
the king defeated King Edward and his army,
captured Hugh Le Despenser,
and tried the young chamberlain with treason.
Despenser was, unsurprisingly, found guilty and hung, drawn,
and courted for his crimes.
Fearing that her husband would once again undermine her,
Queen Isabella forced King Edward II to abdicate his throne.
It was decided that their son,
Edward III, would take over in his place.
(energetic music)
He was only 15 when the English crown
came to rest on his head, but the young king
already had a big mess ahead of him to clean up.
His father's unorthodox style of governance
had left England in a financially precarious position,
and the crown's influence had been steadily undermined
by the barons who administered the lands.
But before he could set about fixing his kingdom,
he would have to wait to come of age.
In the meantime, his mother Isabella
and Roger Mortimer ruled as regents in his place.
However, King Edward hated this.
Mortimer held all the power,
and Edward grew resentful of his mother,
who always sided with her lover on courtly matters.
In 1330, on the eve of his 18th birthday,
King Edward III rebelled against his regents,
having his mother's lover hanged
and taking full control over the English crown.
With power now firmly his,
Edward did what most medieval kings do.
He waged war.
Turning his attention
to the newly independent Kingdom of Scotland,
he mounted a successful campaign against them,
crushing their army and retaking land his father had lost.
But these gains were hard to hold onto,
and soon a new conflict
would demand all of King Edward's attention.
In 1337, King Philip VI of France
confiscated the English king's Duchy of Aquitaine,
a move that greatly angered Edward.
Instead of seeking a peaceful resolution
like his father had, King Edward responded
by laying claim to the French throne.
He didn't know it, but this would be the start of a long
and bloody conflict that would come to claim the lives
of millions, outliving him and his grandsons.
(uplifting music)
As the grandson of Philip IV of France,
Edward did technically have a claim to the French throne,
but because of the newly set precedent
of agnatic succession,
which only gave the male heirs a claim to succession,
Edward's link through his mother
was rejected by the French courts.
Regardless, King Edward III was ready to fight.
After some initial setbacks,
the first phase of the war went well for England.
Their success at Crecy and Poitiers
led to the highly favorable treaty of Bretigny,
which saw England make territorial gains on the continent,
but forced Edward to renounce his claim
to the French throne.
This was by no means a peace treaty
and fighting quickly resumed between the two kingdoms,
but by this point, either side
had other greater problems to deal with.
All of Europe, in fact, was reeling as a result
of the single most deadly event in human history.
(bright music)
In 1348, the Black Death had arrived in England.
Plus-filled tumors, bile, and blood,
the streets of London were littered
with the rotting corpses of the dead.
Believed by many to be a curse from God Himself,
the bubonic plague claimed anywhere between 1/3
to half of the population of Europe in just five years.
King Edward was fortunate enough
to avoid contact with the disease,
which spread in the cramped
and overcrowded living conditions of England's major cities
and decimated the normal population.
The plague did more to accelerate social change
than any singular event in English history before it.
The unimaginably high death toll led to a labor shortage
that severely impacted the English economy.
With fewer hands to work the fields,
many landowners were forced to enclose their lands,
switching from traditional labor intensive crop farming
to the comparatively less labor intensive, sheep herding.
Raising sheep required 1/5 of the manpower,
and feudal lords allowed peasants
who had previously been tied to their land
in a style of serfdom to purchase their freedom and leave.
A new class emerged, free laborers.
People who had been previously bound to an area
for generations were now free to move about
and many settled in the large cities
that had been devastated by the plague.
This switch to sheep herding and wool farming
would also transform the English economy
in the coming years, but more on that later.
As a result, by the end of his reign,
King Edward III's kingdom looked almost unrecognizable.
He had transformed England
into one of the most formidable military powers in Europe,
further developed legislation and the role of government,
and completely revamped the economy,
ushering in a golden age
as England recovered from the Black Death.
His 50 years on the English throne
made him the longest ruling king
the English throne had ever seen,
but those final years were dominated
by sickness and ill health.
He died on the 21st of June, 1377,
having outlived his own son, the Black Prince.
The crown was instead passed on
to Edward's grandson, Richard II.
(bright music)
Richard was a young king,
first wearing the crown at just 10 years of age,
which meant like his grandfather before him,
he was forced to rely on the regency of others
while he came of age.
John of Gaunt was the first virtual ruler to take over.
He had stepped in during King Edward's final years
when sickness and age kept the king bound bed
and continued to rule
after King Richard's coronation in 1337.
There was just one problem.
Edward's long reign had by no means been easy,
and by now, the cracks that had started to form previously
were on the verge of entirely breaking apart.
You see, the English treasury had been stretched
to its limits, as it struggled to keep financing
the ongoing Hundred Years' War.
France was larger and wealthier than England
and so had no problem pouring vast amounts of money
behind their armies.
Specifically during this time, there was a very real fear
of a French invasion on the island,
and the English army was in no position to challenge it.
So John of Gaunt introduced a new poll tax
that required every person over the age of 15
to pay one shilling towards the war effort on the continent.
This was not an insignificant amount of money
for people at the time,
and the peasantry strongly opposed the new tax.
With the post-plague economic boom now firmly over,
peasants had returned to low paying work
in an effort to keep food on the table.
Alongside this, landowners in England
had been trying to reintroduce servility
and serfdom back to the land,
and all these factors combined to form one major event
that threatened King Richard's rule immensely.
(dramatic music)
Led by the Priest John Ball,
a mob of 100,000 people marched on London
demanding the new poll tax be abolished,
a major uprising known as the Peasants' Revolt.
The crowd was unruly,
and within hours of their arrival in the capital,
a destructive rampage broke out.
The protestors burnt down the Savoy Palace,
home of John of Gaunt,
and even murdered the archbishop of Canterbury.
Faced with a little choice,
King Richard II and the lord mayor of London
met with the demonstrators in a field
just outside the city to discuss their terms.
The conversation began amicably enough,
but one of the other leaders, Wat Tyler, grew abusive
and demanded more than the king and mayor would concede.
Offended, the lord mayor of London drew his sword
and killed Tyler on the spot.
Fearing that the crowd would turn violent again,
the young king made an extraordinarily brave move.
Standing before the crowd,
he shouted to the peasants to follow him.
Leading them away from their leader's dead body,
he promised that he would enact the reforms
they had insisted on and successfully disperse the crowd.
These were, however, hollow promises.
Immediately after the protesters had returned home,
the king's council of advisors
revoked any concessions made by their ruler
and swiftly set about crushing the rebels.
The leaders of the Peasants' Revolt were tried
and hanged as traitors for their crimes.
The king never forgot the actions of his council,
and this episode ignited a deep sense of mistrust
between himself and his advisors.
As a result, his inner circle shrink
until it only included three men,
who in turn became extremely powerful
due to their closeness to the king.
The other nobles became resentful of this favoritism
and feared that their power would soon diminish as a result.
Banding together, a group of powerful lords united
to form a group called the Lords Appellant.
They seized control of the English government in 1387
and demanded the king expel his inner circle from court.
A period of instability followed
and culminated in the king being forced to banish
or execute those closest to him.
For the next decade, the fragile peace held,
and King Richard was slowly able
to reestablish royal authority,
and bring it away from the merciless parliament
of the Lords Appellant.
In 1397, the king had amassed enough support
to get his revenge.
In a period that historians
would come to call a Richard's tyranny,
the king captured, tried,
and executed a number of the Appellant Lords.
In 1398, Richard's tyranny went a step further,
as he declared all acts of the merciless parliament
to be null and void.
He then delegated all parliamentary power
to a committee of 12 lords and six commoners,
each chosen by the king himself,
effectively making Richard an absolute ruler
who no longer needed parliament's support,
but there still existed a threat
to Richard's rule, House Lancaster.
At its head sat John of Gaunt
who represented the most powerful non-royal household
on the island.
King Richard had exiled John's son, Henry Bolingbroke,
during his initial takeover a year before,
but House Lancaster still stood in his way.
Not only did they possess enormous wealth,
but they were royal descendants.
John, being King Edward III's youngest surviving son,
as a result, it was the wish of many in the land
that House Lancaster would succeed a childless Richard
to the English throne.
Lucky for Richard though, John of Gaunt died in 1399,
giving the king time to secure his power.
He had John's son, Henry Bolingbroke,
who he'd exiled to France, disowned, confiscating his lands
and effectively stripping Bolingbroke
of his claim to the throne.
Feeling as though he'd effectively dealt
with the Lancastrian threat, Richard turned his attention
to the growing Irish problem in the west.
He amassed an army of 8,000 men
and left England in May, 1399,
landing in Dublin within the week, but just a month later,
triple on the continent spilled over into England.
Charles VI, King of France, had been deposed by Louis I,
and the new French king saw a chance
to gain the upper hand against his English foe.
In a continuation of the Hundred Years' War,
Louis allowed Henry Bolingbroke to return to England
with a small force, where Henry soon gathered more support
and made a claim to the throne.
With Richard off fighting in Ireland,
Henry's arrival was entirely unchallenged.
He gathered an army
and soon defeated King Richard II in battle.
The king was then imprisoned
and later died of starvation while in the Tower of London.
While Henry's claim to the throne was weak,
it was unopposed by both the people and parliament,
and Henry Bolingbroke was crowned Henry IV
on the 30th of September, 1399.
(bright music)
The reign of Henry IV was marked by a series of firsts.
He is believed to be the first king
since the Normans had invaded in 1066
to address his people in English
as opposed to Norman French.
He also hosted a visit from Manuel II Palaiologos
shortly after his coronation in 1400,
making this the only time a Byzantine emperor
ever visited England.
In 1406, English pirates captured
the future James I of Scotland.
Then, aged 11, off the coast of Yorkshire,
the young prince would remain Henry's prisoner
for the rest of his reign.
Aside from that, though,
the reign of King Henry IV was largely uneventful.
He was mainly forced to deal with plots
and rebellions from abroad, as well as a number
of domestic assassination attempts on his life.
He put down a rebellion in Wales
against Owain Glyndwr in 1400
and was forced to deal with a series of rebellions
led by Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland in the north.
The Percy Rebellion, as it came to be known,
ended at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403,
where Henry's eldest son, Henry of Monmouth,
showed great military prowess, leading his troops
in a decisive victory against Percy's forces.
During the battle, though, Henry of Monmouth
was struck by an arrow to the face, but luckily survived.
During the last years of his rule,
the rebellions had become more frequent.
A rumor soon took hold in London that Richard II
who had died of starvation in the Tower of London
was actually still alive.
This was all in spite of Henry's best efforts
to prove Richard had died while in captivity.
King Henry had the body of Richard on display
at St. Paul Cathedral shortly after his death
in an effort to prove to his supporters
that the old king had in fact died
and that his death had not been violent.
However, this didn't stop Scottish emissaries
from traveling throughout the villages of England
declaring that Richard was alive
and residing at the Scottish court.
Sir Elias Lyvet and his associate Thomas Clark
searched for an appropriate lookalike
and promised him Scottish aid to carry out the insurrection.
Unsurprisingly, the rebellion came to nothing.
Lyvet was released
and Clark was thrown into the Tower of London.
Towards the end of his life,
Henry was taken by recurring bouts of serious ill health.
Henry died in London at the Abbot's House
of Westminster Abbey and the Jerusalem Chamber
during a convocation of parliament.
He was buried at Canterbury Cathedral
adjacent to the shrine of Thomas Becket.
The English throne in its entirety
would go on to his son, Henry of Monmouth.
(gloomy music)
On April 9th, 1413, Henry of Monmouth
was crowned Henry V at Westminster Abbey.
On the day of his coronation,
a terrible snowstorm blew over the crowds,
but the king addressed as people despite it.
Described as very tall with a slim build
and a ruddy complexion,
the young king had developed a taste for battle
during his father's reign before him.
He'd helped quash the Welsh rebellion
and personally commanded the royal army to victory
at the Battle of Shrewsbury at just 16 years of age.
But Henry V had inherited many of the same problems
his father had dealt with.
The Lancastrian claim had its fair share of doubters,
and the young king immediately
set about securing his position on the throne.
He wanted to rule a unified England
and not deal with the constant threat of pretenders
and usurpers like his father had.
He allowed his past indifferences to be forgotten,
honorably reinterring the late Richard II,
giving Richard's son, Edmund Mortimer,
a place on the council and gradually restoring titles
in a states of those
who had suffered under his father's reign.
When he did face a serious threat,
he proved a decisive decision maker.
He ruthlessly put down the Lollard discontent in 1414
and the Southampton Plot of 1415,
which involved a number of earls and barons
who supported Edmund Mortimer's claim to the throne,
which was easily dealt with
as had failed to gain much popular support.
Mortimer himself remained loyal
to the king throughout the plot.
He promoted the use of the English language in government,
keeping records in English
and using English in his personal correspondence
for the first time since the Norman Conquest
350 years earlier.
With his domestic situation now under control,
Henry could turn his attention abroad.
The Hundred Years' War was still ongoing,
despite a brief period of inactivity from both sides.
In 1415, King Henry V took an army
and landed at Harfleur in Normandy,
intent on regaining territory on the continent.
After a brief siege,
Henry and his men take the city of Harfleur,
but it's a costly victory.
It had taken Henry longer than he would've liked
and his men had suffered.
Having arrived in Normandy with 12,000 men,
Henry's troops now numbered only 6,000
due to desertion, starvation, and disease.
Against the advice of his council,
he ordered his men to march across the French countryside
towards the English held port city of Calais
where they could re-arm and return to England.
Unable to cross the river Somme,
Henry V was forced to make a detour inland
where he was intercepted by French forces
near the village of Agincourt.
Henry's men were exhausted.
The French army outnumbered them five to one,
and many of the rank and file were suffering from dysentery.
Regardless, Henry had little choice
but to meet the French in battle.
Heavy rain the night before
had made the ground around them a marshy bog,
and as the astute tactician that he was,
he intended to use that to his advantage.
At 11:00 AM, the French army attacked,
mounting a cavalry charge straight at the main English line.
Henry brought his archers forward
and ordered them to unleash hell.
With a 250 meter killing range,
the English longbowman slaughtered the French cavalry
who had been slowed down in the mud.
Many were forced to dismount,
and some drowned in the thick mud where they stood.
By the time the cavalry reached the English line,
Henry had ordered his archers
to drive large, pointed stakes into the ground,
a new tactic never before employed
by the English against the French.
The charge was rendered useless and a melee broke out.
Eventually, the English archers abandoned their bows
and took the fighting hand to hand.
The tide of the battle
quickly turned in favor of the English
who hacked the French soldiers to death,
many of whom who were stuck in the mud
due to their heavy armor.
Before long, Henry was victorious.
His army marched in Calais unopposed.
When he returned to England just a few months later,
he received a hero's welcome.
Crowds lined the streets, pageants took place,
and choir sang in all the churches.
It was a great moment of pride for England
and proved to be the greatest English victory
of the Hundred Years' War.
From a practical standpoint,
it greatly bolstered Henry V's claim to the French throne.
It directly led to infighting within the French court,
and by 1420, the Treaty of Troyes was signed,
acknowledging Henry as regent and heir to the French throne.
By now, Henry had regained control of Normandy,
was allied with the Duchy of Burgundy,
and had received support from King Sigismund of Hungary
who signed the Treaty of Canterbury,
acknowledging the English claim to the throne.
Unification of the kingdoms
of England and France seemed inevitable.
It was Henry's intention that after unifying the two crowns
he would embark on a crusade.
However, he died just a few years later in 1422,
passing the throne onto his son, Henry VI.
While Henry V's reign was short,
it transformed England into a powerful player
in European politics
and forged in her a new national identity.
England once again had a land on the continent,
and under King Henry, England reached its territorial peak
in mainland Europe.
(suspenseful music)
Henry VI was crowned at Westminster Abbey
on the 1st of September, 1422.
Young kings were nothing new in the realm,
but Henry VI broke every English record,
ascending to the throne at just nine months old
and becoming the youngest ever king of England.
Still breastfeeding, the burden of administration
quickly fell to regents who ruled England together.
Just a few months after his coronation in England,
the baby King Henry traveled to France
and was crowned king of France at Notre-Dame Cathedral
in accordance with the Treaty of Troyes
his father had signed just a few years earlier.
This made King Henry VI the only English king
to also be crowned king of France in French territory.
While he waited to come of age,
Henry's mother, Catherine, remarried to Owen Tudor
and had two sons, Edmund and Jasper.
Henry gave his half-brothers earldoms in Normandy,
and their influence would later have a huge impact
on English history.
By the time he reached 16,
Henry had resumed full authoritative control over England.
However, it came at a bad time.
It was the beginning of the Great Slump,
a period of economic decline
that would last for the next 50 years
and weaken the crown's power in the realm.
Things were only further complicated
by the king's problematic personality.
Described as shy, passive,
and utterly opposed to conflict and violence,
Henry VI was nothing like his father,
and these traits were undesirable of a king
during the medieval times and made him appear weak in court.
Had he been an able administrator,
he might have salvaged some respect,
but Henry would soon prove to be unreliable
in a totally different way.
The king was prone to debilitating bouts of madness
that forced administrative decision making
back into the hands of regents.
This made England unstable and weakened royal authority.
It wasn't long before England declined into anarchy
and lawlessness, disaffected noble's sense
that the crown was weak and capitalized on this.
Quarreling with one another and amassing private armies
to fight for local supremacy,
the king would intermittently resume control,
but with each bout of madness that afflicted him,
his grip on the realm weakened.
To make matters worse, the One Hundred Years' War
that had now been raging for five generations
would sputter to its end under Henry's watch.
England had seen many successes and victories
during its time, but by its conclusion,
Henry had lost all of his father's lands in France,
retaining only the port city of Calais,
further adding to his image of a weak king.
With his kingdom fracturing around him,
it wasn't long before England broke out
into civil war again.
One of the more powerful noble houses
had been slowly amassing support,
while Henry struggled to keep a grip on his sanity.
House York, who claimed descendancy from Edward III,
the Plantagenet king who ruled before Henry Bolingbroke
took the throne by force less than 100 years ago,
was preparing to make its move on the English throne.
In 1460, tensions finally erupted
and the War of the Roses had begun.
So named for the red rose of Lancaster
and the white rose of York,
the Yorkist rebels scoured a quick
and early victory at the Battle of Northampton
on the 10th of July, 1460,
capturing King Henry and making him a Yorkist prisoner.
The queen, however, was able to escape,
traveling through Wales and into Scotland
where she sought refuge
in the court of the Scottish queen regent, Mary of Guelders.
After amassing an army of her own,
she marched back into England
seeking to rescue her imprisoned husband.
After defeating the Yorkist army at the Battle of Wakefield,
she marched her army south to St. Albans
where the king was being held.
There she engaged with the Earl of Warwick,
defeating him and freeing the king from captivity.
Henry's mental state at this time was so fractured
that reports state that the king laughed
and sing as the battle raged around him.
The Lancastrian victories were short-lived, however,
as Edward of York rallied his troops
and met the royal army at the Battle of Towton in 1461.
Under a thick blanket of snow,
the Battle of Towton became the bloodiest battle
that ever took place on English soil
and resulted in a decisive Yorkist victory.
Edward deposed Henry VI from the throne
and hastily crowned himself king of England.
Despite this, though, the war would continue
as Henry fled the battle
and became a fugitive in his own kingdom.
Henry VI was eventually betrayed
by the black monk of Addington
and captured by Yorkist forces.
The new King Edward decided to spare the mad king's life,
instead putting him in the Tower of London.
(light music)
Edward of York was crowned Edward IV
on the 28th of June, 1461
following his victories against the Lancastrian army.
As a usurper, the new king
desperately needed parliamentary support to back his claim,
but many of the lords in England
still supported the old King Henry
and chose to stay neutral during the conflict.
This forced Edward to rely heavily
on a small group of noblemen,
mainly Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick.
This over-reliance would directly lead
to King Edward IV losing his grip on the English crown.
Warwick had advised the king to marry either Anne of France
or Bona of Savoy to strengthen England's ties with France
and effectively outmaneuver the Duchy of Burgundy,
which had been growing in power
and influence in Europe over the last decade.
Edward, however, had other ideas.
He married Elizabeth Woodville,
a woman of considerably lower social class than the king
and a widow, but someone
who historians claim was enchanting nonetheless.
This enraged Warwick who began to seek allies elsewhere.
In 1467, King Edward dealt Warwick another humiliating blow,
dismissing his brother from his position as lord chancellor.
By now, though, Warwick had amassed enough support
to challenge the unpopular king.
He traveled to London with an army
and intended to remove the evil councilors
that had taken hold of the English government.
With the king preoccupied in the north,
Neville's army was easily able to defeat the royal troops
at Edgecote Moor in 1469.
The king's father-in-law, Richard Woodville,
alongside his youngest son, Richard,
were captured and executed at Kenilworth.
However, it quickly became apparent
that Warwick had little support in the capital, and Edward,
who had been captured and imprisoned at Middleham Castle,
was released and allowed to resume the throne.
What followed was a period of tense stability.
Warwick was ousted from Edward's courts
and decided on traveling to France
where he sought support from the continent
and vowed to restore Henry VI,
who was currently still alive in the Tower of London
to the English throne.
Yorkist rule had become increasingly unpopular,
and Warwick was able to gather an army of 30,000 men
in support of his cause.
Landing back in England on the 9th of September, 1470,
King Edward was a no match for Warwick's army,
and he fled to Bruges to avoid capture.
Warwick restored King Henry VI to the throne,
but with this, the same problems
that had plagued the mad king's reign simply returned,
mental instability meant a lack of central leadership,
and caused the nobility to fight amongst itself for power,
like it had previously.
Edward, meanwhile, returned to England
aided by powerful Flemish merchants
and immediately sought support in York.
Marching through the realm, he slowly gathered an army
and turned his attention to the capital.
He entered London unopposed
and imprisoned Henry VI once again.
Warwick was killed at the Battle of Barnet in 1471,
while a second Lancastrian army was defeated
at the Battle of Tewkesbury only a month later.
Henry's only son, Edward of Westminster,
died on the battlefield,
while Henry himself passed away less than a year later.
With the old King and his heir dead,
King Edward had hoped his throne would now be secure,
but the realm was in disarray, plagued by instability
and infighting after years of civil war.
King Edward was able to maintain his grip on power,
but toward the end of his reign, he became increasingly ill
and died on the 9th of April, 1483.
His son, Edward V, was to take over as King of England,
but as Edward was only little,
the king named his brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
as lord protector and regent while Edward came of age.
But Edward would never be crowned
and England would soon discover that the new lord protector
had little intention of vacating his position on the throne.
(foreboding music)
Richard took over as lord protector of the realm
immediately after the death of his brother, King Edward IV.
Royal records do show that plans were made
for Edward the V's coronation,
but there is great debate amongst scholars
as to how much of this was genuine
or merely a show put on by the new lord protector
to appease the old king's supporters.
Richard's reputation as a ruthless power grabber
initially stems from the speed
with which he took control of the English crown.
Shortly after his appointment as lord protector,
he brutally put down a supposed plot against his life
that involved the new king's uncles, Anthony Woodville.
Upon the queen's request,
Richard and Anthony Woodville were to meet at Northampton
and accompany the young Edward down to the capital,
providing him safety
and legitimacy as he ascended the throne.
But while the young king waited
for the arrival of his uncles, Richard got to work.
He had Anthony Woodville and his associates arrested
and sent to Pontefract Castle,
where the men were tried and executed for an alleged plot
against the new lord protector's life.
Richard quickly notified his nephew
of the treasonous actions of his uncle and reassured the boy
that they had been dealt with accordingly.
He alone led Edward into London
and transferred the boy to the royal apartments
in the Tower of London,
as was customary for any king awaiting his coronation,
but Richard's plan was only just beginning.
Upon hearing the news of her brother's demise,
the dowager queen fled to the capital
and sought support from those
who had been loyal to her husband,
but Richard had beaten her to it.
He accused those close to the queen
of being complicit in the plot against his life
and had them executed within days of the trial,
with the Woodville's power base in tatters.
Richard had only one obstacle in between himself
and the English throne, the princes in the tower.
As luck would have it, the lord protector was informed
by the bishop of Bath and Wells
that King Edward IV's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville
was in fact invalid
due to King Edward still having been married
to Eleanor Butler at the time of his union with Woodville.
This meant that Edward and Richard,
the princes in the tower,
were illegitimate and could not rule.
A sermon was preached on the steps of St. Paul's Cathedral
on the day of the new king's coronation,
declaring Edward V to be a bastard
and asserting that Richard III
was the rightful heir to the English throne.
Shortly after this, the citizens of London
and its nobility converged and drew up a petition
asking Richard to assume direct control of the throne.
On the 6th of July, 1483, Lord Protector Richard
was crowned Richard III, King of England.
Power was his.
That same summer, the princes
who had been quietly living in the Tower,
silently disappeared.
There are many theories as to what happened,
from being murdered by Richard himself
to fleeing to Europe under the cover of darkness,
but the mystery of the Princes in the Tower still remains
one of the greatest unsolved questions in English history.
But despite the ease
with which Richard had assumed the throne,
his power base was still fragile, and it wasn't long
before he was faced with his first major threat,
the Buckingham Rebellion.
Led by the earl of Buckingham
and a number of disaffected nobility
who had been fiercely loyal to the old King Edward IV,
they quietly planned to overthrow the new King Richard.
They saw the new regime for what it was, a power grab,
and they saw to give the crown back
to the young Prince Edward currently in the Tower of London.
But when rumors of Prince Edward's death
began to circulate throughout the realm,
Buckingham had to change his plan.
Luckily for him, there was another candidate
ready and willing just to cross the channel, Henry Tudor.
As the son of Lady Margaret Beaufort,
herself a ascendant of King Edward III,
Henry had a legal claim to the English throne,
regardless of how weak it actually was.
Buckingham gathered his troops in Wales,
while Henry Tudor, who had been exiled to France,
gathered an army on the continent.
However, just like it had in 1066,
bad weather once again played an important part
in the fate of England.
As Henry and his ships were delayed
crossing the English Channel by a fierce storm,
most of his fleet was forced
to turn back to their ports in Normandy and Calais,
while Henry himself anchored
at Plymouth to wait out the gale.
Buckingham's army was troubled by the same storm on land,
and when Richard's troops arrived to face the rebel army,
many of Buckingham's men deserted,
leaving the earl to be captured,
tried, and beheaded in Salisbury.
When Henry heard of Buckingham's fate, he fled to Paris,
where the French regent supplied him
with a fresh army with which to invade a year later in 1485.
On the 22nd of August, the armies of Henry Tudor
and King Richard III met at Bosworth Field
near the city of Leicester.
Accounts of the battle claim that the king's forces
heavily outnumbered that of the Tudor rebel.
But as Richard was about to discover, who he had with him
was about to become far more important
than how many he had with him.
King Richard divided his army into three main units.
One section would be led by the duke of Norfolk,
the other by the earl of Northumberland,
while Richard himself would take control
of the bulk of the army.
The battle began with King Richard
attacking Henry Tudor's forces head on.
The melee was brutal,
and fierce, hand-to-hand combat broke out,
but Henry's army was well-drilled
and led by the earl of Oxford,
an incredibly competent military strategist.
Despite a numerical disadvantage,
the earl was able to inflict serious casualties
on the royal army,
causing some of the duke of Norfolk's troops
to flee the battle.
It was at this moment that Richard turned to Northumberland
and signaled for the earl to reinforce his lines,
but Northumberland refused.
Meanwhile on a hill overlooking the battle,
Sir William Stanley, son of the earl of Stanley,
had arrived with his army.
He had been loyal to Richard in the Yorkist regime
since the start of the War of Roses 30 years ago.
Stanley had been present at the Battle of Tewkesbury
when Edward IV took the throne,
and Richard had even rewarded him
after his ascension to power with land in North Wales.
But this meant little to Stanley
who held off on joining either side
until a clear winner had emerged.
With Northumberland refusing to come to his aid,
Richard feared that he might lose control of his army soon.
So he mounted a risky attack,
intending to charge right into Henry's forces,
and kill the young pretender himself,
ending the battle and securing a victory.
But seeing the king separated from his main army,
Stanley made a decision
that changed the course of English history.
He joined on the side of Henry Tudor,
surrounding King Richard and his men
and removing the king from his horse.
"My horse, my horse, a kingdom for my horse,"
the king shouted as he fought bravely surrounded
by swarms of his enemies.
King Richard reportedly came with an a swords length
of Henry Tudor before finally being overwhelmed
by Stanley and his men.
He was killed where he stood.
The Battle of Bosworth Field was over
and the reign of Richard III had ended.
He would be the last English king to die in battle.
Myth has it that the English crown
was found propped up against a bush nearby.
It was taken and placed on Henry Tudor's head
right there on the battlefield.
Richard's body was buried without ceremony
in a nearby abbey in Leicester.
His death marked the official end of the War of Roses,
and Richard III became the last Plantagenet king
to rule over the island.
(light music)
After over three decades of civil war,
England had a new king.
Henry Tudor was crowned Henry VII at Westminster Abbey
on the 30th of October, 1485.
His ascension marks the beginning
of the early modern period of English history.
As a king by right of conquest,
Henry faced the difficult challenge
of consolidating his power
and securing his position on the throne.
He did this by marrying Elizabeth of York,
daughter of Edward IV,
and uniting the warring houses of Lancaster
and York together to form the new house, Tudor.
He punished those loyal to the old king
and rewarded any man who swore fealty to him,
promising not to confiscate their lands
or remove their royal titles.
Many welcome the change in leadership
and pledged their support to the Tudor king.
Once his position as ruler was more secure,
he turned his attention to repairing the kingdom he had won,
and England was in serious need of repair.
Decades of civil war and two years patience
in the last three years had left the realm
in serious administrative and financial disarray.
But thankfully, King Henry proved
to be the right man for the job.
The new king believed in something called royal absolutism,
essentially the divine right of kings
to rule as they saw fit
without having to answer to nobility, church, or parliament.
This led Henry to take a much more hands-on approach
to the everyday running of his kingdom.
He was a stickler for details, and quickly proved himself
to be a highly capable administrator and diplomat.
Up first was the crown's finances.
Civil wars are never great for the treasury,
and after 30 years of fighting on top of the Great Slump
that it only ended five years before his ascension,
England's financial situation was in tatters.
He revitalized the Exchequer
and improved tax collection in the realm
by keeping the same financial advisors
throughout his entire reign.
This gave the Office of the Exchequer
a strong sense of stability
and allowed the men to refine their processes.
He was also far less extravagant than his predecessors,
choosing to be fiscally responsible
instead of spending lavishly on feasts and events.
He introduced the Acts of Resumption in 1486,
which gave him access to all the lands given away
during the War of the Roses,
and placed them directly under the crown's control,
greatly improving his financial situation.
But perhaps his greatest economic achievement
was the Magnus Intercursus or the Great Agreement.
As you might remember, a few generations ago,
England had switched from majority crop farming
to sheep tending.
Now, centuries later, the English wool trade had exploded
and become the island's main economic export into Europe.
But that export was directly threatened
when Margaret of Burgundy supported Perkin Warbeck,
a pretender to the throne
and one of the first major rebellions
Henry was forced to deal with during his reign.
The king enacted a trade embargo with Burgundy,
cutting off their supply of wool
and severely limiting the amount of English trade
that was going into the continent.
But wool was an important material.
An English wool was prized from Paris to Rome,
so it wasn't long before the two nations
began talks of negotiation.
What emerged was the Magnus Intercursus,
a treaty which reopened trade between the two countries,
but heavily favored England as it removed the taxation
of English goods going into Europe,
making the island rich in the process.
And speaking of pretenders,
Henry had two major uprisings during his reign.
The first was the Lambert Simnel,
a young boy who had been somewhat forced into pretending
to be one of the young princes in the tower.
After his army was defeated,
King Henry showed great mercy in sparing the boy's life,
giving him a job in his kitchens
for the remainder of his existence.
The next was Perkin Warbeck, a more serious threat
as he gained support from Margaret of Burgundy
and gathered an invasion force to invade the island.
Warbeck too was defeated, but unlike Lambert Simnel,
he did not escape a gruesome death.
He was hung alongside his supporters.
In all, King Henry VII's reign
was a remarkably peaceful and prosperous time.
He was a fantastic and able administrator
and ruled for a long 24 years where the crown's influence
and control grew alongside her treasury.
The realm welcomed the stability King Henry brought,
and his legitimacy
was never seriously questioned or challenged.
But the later years of his reign were marked
by personal tragedy.
He lost his eldest son, Arthur,
to the English sweating sickness,
and was reportedly stricken with grief.
The normally stoic and reserved king
could apparently be heard sobbing at the loss of his son.
A year later, he lost his wife, Queen Elizabeth,
and reportedly locked himself away for weeks,
speaking to no one.
Many of his courtiers note
that King Henry never truly recovered
after the death of his wife.
He died on the 21st of April, 1509,
and was succeeded by his son, Henry, Duke of York.
(gentle piano music)
There is a strong argument to be made
that there is no English king more famous than Henry VIII,
an ironic sentiment when you consider
he was never actually meant to be king.
King Henry VII's eldest son was Arthur, Prince of Wales.
Born in 1486, he spent his life training in the royal courts
and being groomed to take over from his father before him.
His younger brother, Henry, meanwhile,
was raised as a prince with little responsibility.
Hunting, drinking, and competing,
these were the pursuits Henry occupied himself with
during his childhood, and he was more than happy
to watch his brother take the throne.
At just 15 years old, Arthur was married
to Catherine of Aragon,
daughter of the powerful Catholic monarchy in Spain,
uniting the two kingdoms as one.
However, just six months after his marriage to Catherine,
the newlyweds came down
with a bad case of sweating sickness.
Catherine survived, while Arthur unfortunately perished,
leaving the throne to fall to his younger brother Henry.
History has not been kind to Henry VIII,
and the Tudor king is often remembered for two main things,
his six wives and his break from the Catholic church.
He is often portrayed as large,
bordering on obese, rude, mad, and wholly uncultured,
a stark contrast to how Henry was actually perceived
during his life.
He was a natural athlete, a talented musician,
religious, and well-learned,
traits which made the young King Henry
extremely popular in court
and to the other rulers of Europe.
But while Henry may have impressed in court,
he was not an able statesman by any means.
He had zero interest in administration
and was considerably less frugal than his father,
which unsurprisingly resulted
in the vastly filled treasuries
being depleted of gold by the end of his reign.
Henry had a council who listened to him
due to his willingness to kill.
The council fulfilled their duties.
Sir Thomas More, a member of the council, served Henry.
Though the two became very close friends.
Seeking to unload the burden of administration,
King Henry put Cardinal Wolsey in charge of England.
The son of a Suffolk wool merchant,
Wolsey was a shrewd diplomat
and was able to keep England afloat,
despite the king's best efforts to bankrupt her.
Wolsey's rise through the ranks of the clergy
was unparalleled, from bishop of London
to archbishop of York,
and then cardinal and lord chancellor of England,
to finally papal legate himself.
Wolsey was one of the most successful new men
of his generation.
There were even serious considerations to make Wolsey pope.
Scholars believe that part of the reason Wolsey
was eventually passed on for pope
was because of the role England was playing
during the Reformation.
Europe as a whole was undergoing major religious upheaval,
where many religious scholars and academic thinkers
were challenging the established ideas of the church.
It was called the Reformation,
and many of these reformers called England their home.
They believed the church had become corrupt.
But it's important to note,
King Henry's break from the Catholic church
had nothing to do with his support for the Reformation.
Henry was in fact a religious conservative,
and his break from the Catholic church was wholly selfish
and for personal gain only.
You see, after the death of his brother,
Henry had received special dispensation from the pope
to marry his brother's widow,
thanks to the fact that their marriage
had never been consummated.
For a long time, the pair were happily married,
but as the years wore on, a problem soon became evident.
Henry desperately wanted a male heir,
and after 24 years of marriage to Catherine of Aragon,
they had produced only one child, Mary.
This led the king's eyes to wander,
and they quickly landed on Anne Boleyn,
one of the queen's ladies in waiting.
Anne Boleyn refused Henry's advances
and insisted that if he wanted her,
he would need to marry her.
Henry returned to his expert chancellor, Cardinal Wolsey.
Wolsey had the unenviable task of asking the pope
if he would null the king's marriage to Catherine.
The Pope denied it.
Henry was furious, and looking for someone to blame,
he fired Wolsey from his post and accused him of treason.
Wolsey was saved from a long and humiliating trial
as he died shortly after his deposition.
Henry soon found himself in a race against time.
Anne had fallen pregnant,
and the king was certain she was carrying a boy.
As he was still married to Catherine,
any child born from another woman would be illegitimate
and unable to succeed him as heir.
Knowing the pope was unsympathetic to his cause,
he turned to parliament,
forcing them to declare his first marriage void.
He married Anne in secret,
and their child was born soon after.
To Henry's dismay, however, it was a girl,
the future Elizabeth I.
Henry's actions greatly angered not just the clergy,
but the Spanish Kingdom of Aragon, sparking a conflict
that would come to have serious consequences
on England in the coming decades.
As his relationship with the pope had soured,
Henry decided to take matters into his own hands.
In 1534, the Acts of Supremacy was passed,
making Henry, not the pope, head of the Church of England.
But how was Henry able to pull this off?
Rome had been the head of the English church
since the time of the great Anglo-Saxon kingdoms,
put simply, the Reformation.
The church had incurred a tremendous amount of bad feeling
from everyone in England with church officials being seen
as wealthy, corrupt, and removed from the ordinary man.
With Henry now at the head of the Church of England,
he was free to do as he pleased.
Those who disagreed would be killed.
Henry asserted the greatest power
when he had Thomas More beheaded
for refusing to take the oath of succession.
It didn't matter who you were, Henry would punish.
Henry VIII deeply regretted the killing.
It was his one life regret.
After Anne Boleyn failed to provide Henry
with the male heir he wanted,
Henry believed she was having an affair with her brother.
He had both of them charged with treason and beheaded.
He married Jane Seymour next,
a woman of considerably lower education
than his previous two marriages,
but someone he was deeply fond of.
She was successful in giving Henry a male heir, Edward,
but the boy was sickly and there were serious doubts
about his ability to make it into adulthood.
So Henry kept trying.
Jane Seymour died of postnatal complications
a few weeks after the birth of Edward,
and the heartbroken king mourned her loss heavily.
In 1540, however, he was persuaded to marry Anne of Cleves,
but Anne wasn't exactly what you'd call a looker,
and their bond lasted only a year
before Henry had that marriage annulled too.
That same year he married the 19-year-old Catherine Howard,
cousin of the late Anne Boleyn.
She too was beheaded.
His final wife, Catherine Parr,
had the luxury of being widowed by the 55-year-old Henry
who died in 1547.
He was buried at St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle,
beside the remains of his third wife, Jane Seymour.
His reign had been described
as one of the most important in English history.
Henry VIII died believing he had achieved
what he'd wanted all along,
a male heir on the English throne.
But as we'll soon find out,
his actions were about to plunge England
into a period of instability and destruction
that would lead to the death of all,
but one of his children.
(suspenseful music)
Crowned on the 20th of February, 1547,
Edward was just nine when he came to the throne,
and thus saw his kingdom ruled by a regency council
led by his uncle Edward Seymour.
The youngest of Henry's three children,
Edward was the first English king
raised completely Protestant, and his reign was marked
by major economic and religious upheaval.
The former was very much a gift from his father, Henry VIII,
who spent and squandered the vast wealth of the crown
through excessive flamboyance and mismanagement.
Things were not helped by a costly and ineffective war
Edward VI waged against Scotland, which ended in peace
in exchange for the withdrawal of troops
from Scottish territory and northern France.
But perhaps most impactful was the immense religious change
England soon found itself under.
While Henry had broken away from the Catholic church,
he still remained fervently Catholic in doctrine,
upholding its traditions and practices throughout the realm.
But King Edward meanwhile was raised a total Protestant,
and under the regency of the Lord Protector Seymour,
vast and sweeping religious reforms were passed in England.
Staples of the Catholic church,
like Mass and clerical celibacy, were abolished,
and Seymour passed the Acts of Uniformity,
which forced all people in the realm
to attend worship on Sunday.
While a little tyrannical, it did introduce the concept
of Sunday as a mandatory day off for the English peasantry.
But while the regents ruled in his place,
King Edward VI struggled with his health.
He was feeble, ghostly pale, and constantly sickly.
In 1553, Edward fell ill and died.
He was only 15 years old.
Before his death, he, alongside his council,
devised a plan for succession.
Childless, Edward wanted to ensure
that his kingdom remained Protestant,
and so passed his crown onto his first cousin
and granddaughter of Henry VII, Lady Jane Grey.
This action, however, removed his older sisters,
Mary and Elizabeth, from the line of succession.
Mary was a devout Catholic and would no doubt have reversed
many of Edward's reformist policies.
As is the case often with royal succession,
Edward's passing on the 6th of July
brought chaos to England.
(dramatic music)
Lady Jane Grey never had a coronation.
She struggled to gain support outside the royal courts.
And after just nine days on the throne,
she was removed by Mary I, Henry's eldest daughter
from his first marriage to Catherine of Aragon.
Amassing an army in East Anglia,
Mary marched on London and deposed Jane,
beheading her for treason
and taking the English throne as her own.
Excluding the contested reigns of Lady Jane Grey
and Empress Matilda,
Queen Mary was the first queen regent of England.
But while Mary was able to wrestle control of the crown
back from her Protestant cousin,
England's foothold on Calais would finally be lost,
ending centuries of English presence
on the continent of Europe.
For now, England was once again just an island.
Edward's fear that his half sister would try to undo most,
if not all of his religious reforms,
was confirmed shortly after she came to power.
As a devout Catholic, Mary disliked Protestantism,
seeing it as one of the vehicles
that led to her mother's humiliation and her own disownment.
During her reign, Protestants were severely repressed
and many were burnt at the stake as heretics,
earning the queen a new name, Bloody Mary.
But conflict with the Protestants wasn't enough for Mary,
as she soon became diametrically opposed
with her own parliament.
It was parliament who stopped many of Mary's counter reforms
against Protestantism from becoming law,
something she was greatly angered by.
She entered into an extremely unpopular marriage
with Philip of Spain, himself a devout Catholic,
but was blocked by parliament
from making him co-ruler of England,
essentially barring him from taking over the throne
should Mary die before him.
The parent never had any children,
and in 1558, Queen Mary I fell gravely ill.
It was obvious that she would soon die.
As parliament blocked Philip
from inheriting the English throne,
the crown was to be passed on to Mary's younger sister
and the last person on Earth
who thought she would inherit the English crown, Elizabeth.
(light music)
The pendulum swing of religious reformation
that had gripped England since the reign of Henry VIII
once again shifted towards the side of Protestantism,
with the ascension of Elizabeth as ruler.
She was crowned Queen Elizabeth I
on the 17th of November, 1558.
Unlike her siblings before her,
Elizabeth possessed a keen eye for diplomacy
and a shrewd political mind.
She knew that to remain in power,
she would need both the support of parliament
and the religious bodies of England.
Under Queen Elizabeth, the Church of England,
as we know it today, was officially established in 1563.
It based its dogma on the Protestant belief system,
but the liturgy, rights, and organization
were very much still Catholic in form,
appeasing both sides
and somewhat calming the volatile reformation, for now.
However, religion still posed a great threat
to the new queen,
as she soon faced a Catholic uprising from the north,
led by her cousin, Mary, Queen of Scots.
As the granddaughter of Henry VII,
Mary made a claim to the English throne,
actions which many of the Catholics
in England wholeheartedly supported.
Queen Elizabeth felt threatened by Mary
and her growing power base, but was initially reluctant
to take direct action against her.
She settled for imprisoning Mary in the Tower of London,
but during her imprisonment, it was discovered
that she was in regular correspondence
with many of the queen's enemies.
Elizabeth had no choice.
Mary, Queen of Scots, was executed for treason in 1587.
Soon, however, her attention would be turned away
from domestic matters and onto more international threats.
England's relationship with Spain had slowly been souring
since the reign of her father.
Angered by the treatment of Catherine of Aragon,
and further angered by the treatment
of Mary's husband, Philip of Spain,
relations between the two European superpowers
was at an all time low.
Spain was still firmly Catholic.
Meanwhile, England spearheaded
the new Protestant reformation
that was sweeping over Europe, but the catalyst,
which finally ignited war between the two nations,
was the new world.
Discovered by Christopher Columbus in 1492,
the Spanish crown had been made rich,
thanks to the influx of new materials and minerals
from its territories in the new world.
As England's own empirical ambitions had yet to fully begin,
they resorted to piracy.
English sailors would raid Spanish frigates
traveling across the Atlantic,
stealing their wealth and bringing it back to England.
Publicly, Elizabeth denounced those pirates,
but in private, she supported
and even praised them for their actions,
knighting prominent privateers, as they were called,
like Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins.
By 1588, Spain had had enough.
They amassed a large fleet of ships
with the intention of invading England.
Dubbed the Spanish Armada,
it left Lisbon with over 150 ships
and 18,000 men at their control.
At the time, it was the largest fleet ever seen in Europe
and was widely considered to be invincible.
It easily outnumbered and outgunned the English fleet,
and with news of its departure, fear set in at Westminster.
The armada was cited off the coast of Plymouth,
where English commander Sir Francis Drake
was enjoying a calm game of balls.
Legend has it that Drake insisted on finishing his game
before meeting his enemy in battle.
The English ships sailed out to meet the armada,
and light skirmishes began off the Cornish coast.
English used its smaller and faster ships
to outmaneuver the large and bulky Spanish fleet,
inflicting some early damage on the invading navy.
Following the armada up into the channel,
the Spanish commander in charge of the fleet
was advised to stop and occupy the Isle of Wight,
but refused and instead continued on
with his planned rendezvous
with the Duke of Parma's forces in Flanders.
They reached Calais largely intact.
But that night, things were about to change.
Knowing he could not beat the Spanish in an open battle,
Drake devised a plan.
They set entire ships alight
and sailed them into the Spanish fleet anchored at Calais,
causing the fleet to scatter and take heavy losses.
The Spaniard suffered another defeat
at the hands of the smaller English ships
at the Battle of Gravelines.
And as the armada fled up into the North Sea,
English ships gave chase around the island.
Now firmly in the North Sea, Drake and his navy
gave up chasing the Spanish fleet and returned home.
The ships that remained of the Armada
now had the long journey back to Lisbon.
A huge and violent storm erupted
while the Spanish sailed around Scotland
and many ships were shipwrecked.
By the time they returned to Spain,
the mighty armada was in pieces.
Drake was a hero, and England was safe.
The reign of Elizabeth was an incredibly transformative time
in English history.
It marked the emergence of England as a global power
and not just a European one.
The investment into a royal navy
led directly to England's colonial ambitions
in the years that followed.
A cultural renaissance also took hold of the island.
Great playwrights like Shakespeare
and Christopher Marlowe packed theaters in the capital,
while adventurers like Drake and Walter Rowley
explored a new world beyond the borders of Europe.
Her 44 years on the throne was welcomed by all,
and Queen Elizabeth enjoyed great popularity
amongst her subjects.
One of her most defining features was her chastity.
Elizabeth died a virgin in 1603.
She never married, never publicly took suitors,
and as a result, had no heirs.
She was the last Tudor monarch of England.
The issue of succession loomed large
in Elizabeth's later years, but before she died,
an agreement had been reached
that the throne would pass on to her cousin,
James VI of Scotland, son of Mary, Queen of Scots.
This unified England and Scotland peacefully
under one banner for the first time in its history
and laid the foundation for the Kingdom of Great Britain
that was about to take its place
as a superpower on the world stage.
(light music)
On the 24th of March, 1603, James VI of Scotland
was crowned James I, King of England.
It's worth noting that while James was ruler of both England
and Scotland, the two kingdoms were not a unified entity.
They still had separate parliaments,
their own laws, and individual judiciaries.
King James was just a shared head of state.
But it was the first step towards the unification
of the island of Great Britain.
And King James spent most of his rule
fighting to unify the two administrative bodies.
Despite this, however, the reign of the first Stuart king
would mostly be remembered for its conflict and division.
Religion still dominated English domestic policy,
and the king continued to support the Protestants
and their reformation that firmly took hold in England.
During the early years of his rule,
the king had a new version of the Bible commissioned.
Named the King James Bible, it was an English language Bible
that soared in popularity
thanks to its poetic prose and vivid imagery.
Many historians credited
for helping to spread the English language across the globe,
as it quickly became the most printed book ever,
and still remains a popular version of the Bible today.
In 1604, he expelled all Catholic priests from the island,
a move that would spark an explosive reaction
from the increasingly radical Catholic minority,
which still called England their home.
One wet and dark evening in Northamptonshire,
11 men quietly murmured to one another at a nearby inn.
Bathed in candlelight and gripped by religious fervor,
they devised a plan to put an end
to the Protestant reformation and its supporters.
They would take 36 barrels of gunpowder into the cellars
of the newly constructed houses of parliament
and ignite them on the day the building was to open,
killing the king and his council
in a bang of smoke and fire.
It was to be known as the Gunpowder Plot.
Over the course of a few weeks,
they rolled their barrels down,
avoiding deduction and capture night after night.
With the grand opening set for the 5th of November
and the gunpowder ready to blow,
all the plotters had to do was wait, but their plans failed.
An anonymous letter betrayed the plotters,
and on the morning of the grand opening,
royal guards flooded into the cellars to discover a lone man
standing amidst the barrels of gunpowder.
Guy Fawkes was caught and arrested.
He was brutally tortured for several days,
finally giving away the identities
of the other conspirators after three days on the rack.
The gunpowder plotters were rounded up,
captured, and executed.
All around London, people lit bonfires in celebration
of the foiled attack on parliament and the king.
This tradition still exists in England today.
The plotters had hoped their attack
would stop the reformation in its tracks,
but in fact, it had the opposite effect.
King James had once promised not to persecute Catholics,
as long as they be quiet
and give but an outward obedience to the law.
After the failed Gunpowder Plot, however,
he passed a wave of anti-Catholic legislation,
and many in parliament
who had remained decidedly neutral on the reformation,
now firmly supported the Protestant cause.
But for all the religious strife in the realm,
King James's biggest threat actually came from within.
Parliament had been growing increasingly powerful,
and at the start of the 1600s,
their influence in the kingdom was at an all time high.
In 1614, he commented that he was surprised his ancestors
should have permitted such an institution
to come into existence.
It is sedation in subjects to dispute what a king may do
in the height of his power.
Like many before him,
King James believed in the absolute power of the monarchy,
and as a result, resented parliament's ability to challenge
and contest his rule.
But while they may have had their differences,
both ruling bodies were able to compromise
and maintain the peace.
As a result, the reign of King James I was widely considered
to be a peaceful and prosperous time in England.
The English crown established its first colony
in the new world, Jamestown in Virginia,
so named after King James
and the virgin Queen Elizabeth before him.
Meanwhile, the great literary tradition of English writers
continued to flourish as England became a center
for culture and art in Europe.
By the end of his life, King James suffered from ill health
brought on by a lifestyle of excesses.
He would eventually die during a strong bout of dysentery
on the 27th of March, 1625.
At his funeral, it was remarked
that the king died as he lived, in peace.
But cracks in the kingdom had started to show.
Too long had England labored under the strains
of parliamentary conflict and religious upheaval.
The heir to the English throne, Charles I,
was about to inherit a realm that was on the verge
of tearing itself apart.
(light music)
Crowned on the 27th of March, 1625,
Charles I became king of England, Scotland, and Ireland
in front of a large crowd at Westminster Abbey.
He shared in his father's ideas
of a monarch's divine right to rule,
and as such, was determined to limit the power of parliament
and govern over England unchecked and unquestioned.
Their first showdown came in 1627
when King Charles attempted to levy taxes
without parliamentary backing.
Parliament responded with the petition of rights
a year later.
Its basic premise was that no taxes of any kind
could be allowed without the permission of parliament.
For Charles, this was the final straw.
He dissolved parliament
and ruled without it for the next 11 years,
levying a number of dubious taxes
and passing new laws without parliamentary backing,
actions which made the English king extremely unpopular.
During this time, England saw an unprecedented level
of immigration from the island.
It is estimated that up to 60,000 people left England,
with half of them going to the New American colonies
across the Atlantic.
It wasn't only because of the unjust
and steep taxation levied by King Charles,
but because they sought religious freedom in the new world.
The Calvinist movement had become increasingly popular
in the kingdom, especially amongst the middle
and lower classes, and given rise to Puritanism.
Puritans believed that the new Church of England
wasn't Protestant enough in its practices,
and thought it needed to further separate itself
from Catholic doctrine,
which still permeated some aspects of its worship.
Because of the increasing amount of Protestant offshoots
that were springing up, Archbishop Laud
attempted to impose uniformity on the English church,
opposing the Puritan ideal of a stripped back ceremony
in favor of a traditional ceremonial splendor,
similar to that of the Roman Catholics.
As a result, a vast majority of the people
who left for the colonies were Puritans
who wish to practice religion the way they saw fit,
but the impact of King Charles' taxes
should not be understated.
He attempted to levy ship money, a form of taxation
that previously only applied to port cities,
but now applied to the entire country,
leading to a sharp decline in his popularity
and firm opposition to the royal regime.
Angry at the lack of support and desperate for money,
King Charles had no choice but to call parliament.
The Short Parliament, as it came to be known,
sat for just three weeks.
It came to an abrupt end after parliament refused
to vote on any new taxes until the king had listened
to their long list of grievances.
After a rebellion broke out in Scotland just months later,
Charles was once again forced to call parliament.
This time parliament would sit for 20 years,
earning itself the nickname the Long Parliament.
It was apparent to all
that King Charles' power was growing weaker by the day,
and parliament seized on the opportunity
to make increasingly larger demands,
all of which the king refused.
The fractured intense relationship
between the king and his parliament
that had been festering since the reign of King James I
finally caved in.
Fighting broke out in 1642,
marking the beginning of the English Civil War.
It was a conflict that was largely split up
along class lines.
Parliamentary troops or Roundheads, as they were known,
were largely made up of the Protestant middle class.
Meanwhile, the king's army or the Cavaliers
were mainly supported by the nobility, clergy and peasantry.
The war began as a series of indecisive skirmishes
across the region.
It was during this time
that a parliamentary general from East Anglia
began to make a name for himself in the Roundhead army.
Oliver Cromwell rose to prominence
by organizing the irregular parliamentary troops
and transforming them into a disciplined new model army
capable of taking on the king.
But while conflict raged for the fate of the kingdom,
life for most during the Civil War went on as usual,
fewer involved and even fewer knew about the fighting.
In 1644, a farmer at Marston Moor was told to leave
because the armies of parliament and the armies of the king
were preparing to fight on his land.
He responded by saying, "What?
Has them two fallen out then?"
The farmer was probably equally unaware
that the farmland he tilled at Marston Moor
was to be a turning point in the war.
King Charles' army was decisively beaten
by Cromwell and his men,
earning parliament the first major victory of the conflict
and gave them direct control over the north of England.
A year later, the king and his army was once again defeated
at the Battle of Naseby,
losing control of the south of England as well.
The English civil war was over.
Parliament had won.
Marching back into London, they sought peace with the king.
During the conflict, however,
the parliamentary cause became increasingly radicalized
and extreme in their Protestant beliefs.
Archbishop Laud who had pushed back
many of the Calvinist reforms was executed in 1645,
and many within parliament
called for the execution of the king
as the only way to prevent the nation
falling into anarchy again.
In 1649, King Charles was brought to trial in Westminster.
The king was unyielding
and stubbornly stuck to his absolutist beliefs,
refusing every one of parliament's calls for reform.
The radical core had had enough.
Charged with treason by a parliament whose authority
he refused to acknowledge,
King Charles I was executed in Whitehall
on the 30th of January, 1649.
For the first time since the Roman Republic,
England was ruled in its entirety
by a council of representative officials
and not a divine ruler.
England had become a commonwealth.
(dramatic music)
The king's execution was actually delayed by several hours
so that the House of Commons could pass an emergency bill
that declared itself the source
of all just power in the realm.
The reality of the situation was very different.
Almost all power was in the hands of one man,
Oliver Cromwell.
He'd proven himself a highly capable military leader
and retained control of the parliamentary army,
even after the war had ended.
King Charles's son, Charles II,
landed in Scotland shortly after his father's death
and attempted to invade England through the north.
Cromwell defeated his army at Worcester in 1650,
and Charles was forced to flee to France.
Back in London, parliament was struggling to agree
on how the realm should be governed.
Cromwell, growing tired of the unending debates,
dissolved the Rump Parliament
with the use of his armed forces.
In 1653, he established the Protectorate,
an executive council that would directly rule over England
just like the king had before.
You can probably guess who he installed as its leader.
A king in all but name,
Cromwell ruthlessly enforced a set of rigid and strict laws
that followed the Puritan ideal unwaveringly.
Church attendance was compulsory.
Horse racing and cockfighting were banned.
Gambling dens and brothels closed down.
And Cromwell even canceled Christmas.
It wasn't long before the lord protector
had become as autocratic as the king he'd overthrown.
He called parliament when he wanted to raise taxes
and dismissed it when they argued.
In all, it was a time of great repression and prudence.
Pursuits of pleasure were banned,
and many in the realm longed for the days
when kings ruled England.
Cromwell eventually died on the 3rd of September, 1658,
and was buried at Westminster Abbey,
a luxury previously only afforded
to kings and queens of England.
There were attempts to have his son, Richard Cromwell,
take over the post of lord protector,
but Richard was a less impactful character than his father,
and as such, he was ousted shortly after taking the post.
The Commonwealth had become so unpopular
during Cromwell's rule that after his death,
the people called for the king to be reinstated.
Charles II came back from exile
and was recrowned king of England on the 29th of May, 1661.
The body of Oliver Cromwell was exhumed
from its grave at Westminster
and hung at Tyburn for all to see.
When he began to rot, his head was cut off
and put on public display outside Westminster Hall
for the next 20 years.
A statue of Cromwell still stands
at the foot of the Houses of Parliament today.
The Commonwealth and its Protectorate
had a profound impact on English society.
Puritanism became inexorably linked with military rule,
and from this point onwards, the more Puritan aspects
of the reformation were staunchly opposed by parliament,
as the fervor of religion
began to take a backseat in domestic rule.
It also strengthened the bond
between the kingdom and its king.
In the next centuries,
while Europe burned in the crucible of revolution,
England remained a staunch supporter of dynastic rule,
but more on that later.
(light music)
Considerably less hardheaded than his father,
King Charles II oversaw the restoration of the crown
and the reintroduction of the royal family in England.
The new king agreed to many of the proposals
his predecessor had fought so hard against,
and the relationship between king
and parliament improved considerably.
King Charles II then said
about reverting many of the strict Puritan laws
that Cromwell had passed during his protectorship.
Alehouses were reopened,
theaters were allowed to put on shows again,
and sports and dance were revived throughout the region.
But for all the splendor and merry
that King Charles II oversaw, fresh challenges awaited
as the kingdom settled back into its familiar rhythms.
The English navy was at an all time low,
having just lost the second Anglo Dutch war
that saw the Netherlands pertain their position
as the dominant European traitor on the high seas.
Back at home, the Great Plague had struck London,
killing an estimated 70,000 people
and decimating the already dwindling English population.
The following year, the Great Fire of London
burned through the capital,
leaving as much as 450 acres of London real estate
in ash and soot.
While the fire killed many
and destroyed the livelihoods of thousands of Londoners,
it did bring about the end of the Great Plague,
as all the infected rats burned in the inferno.
Moreover, it gave the king a chance
to rebuild parts of the old rundown and ancient city.
Houses were rebuilt with high quality materials,
civil planning was introduced, widening streets
and making the capital feel less cramped.
The old St Paul's Cathedral also needed to be rebuilt,
giving us the stunning architectural masterpiece
we still have today.
Huge changes in government
were also beginning to take shape.
During the reign of King Charles II, there was a move
to the cabinet style of government England still uses today.
Political parties were formed
that became the forerunners to the Tories and Whigs.
England was modernizing at a rapid rate,
spurred on by the new king
and the restoration of the monarchy.
It was considered to be a model nation,
and despite its flaws,
it truly was leading the way in Europe
in terms of freedom and quality of life.
But for all modernization,
religion still plagued domestic policy in the kingdom.
There was an apparent plot to kill the king
and establish Catholicism in England once again.
Known as the Popish Plot of 1678,
it highlighted how Catholics in the realm
still severely opposed the reformation, its ideals,
and the king's perceived role in all this.
As a result of the plot, anti-Catholic sentiments soared
and Catholics were banned from parliament
for the first time in the nation's history.
Despite this though,
King Charles was considerably more popular
than his father before him
and was considered something of a modern man.
He was affable, friendly, and reportedly very easygoing.
His court quickly developed a reputation
for being morally lax, and the king was often criticized
for being overly reserved, especially in political matters.
His marriage to Catherine of Braganza
saw the pair produce no surviving heirs,
but the king did recognize 12 illegitimate children
to various mistresses.
As a result, when King Charles II died
on the 6th of February, 1684,
the throne had to be passed on to his brother, James.
(light music)
James was crowned James II of England
on the same day of his brother's passing in 1684.
He was a staunch Catholic,
and despite the growing anti-Catholic sentiment
that defined England during this time,
he was accepted as king.
But while parliament may have been accepting
of his personal Catholic persuasion,
they were far less tolerant of any supporting legislation.
King James tried unsuccessfully
to enact a number of pro-Catholic policies in the realm.
This quickly turned the two political parties
that had formed, the Whigs and Tories, against him,
and the king grew increasingly more isolated by the day.
In 1685, one of Charles's illegitimate sons,
the Duke of Monmouth, landed in Somerset
and launched a rebellion against his uncle,
supported by local farmers and laborers in the region.
The Pitchfork Rebellion was a short-lived affair
that ended with the battle of Sedgemoor,
the last battle on English soil,
and culminated in the bloodiest sizes,
a series of brutal trials
that punished all those who had supported the rebellion.
Led by the infamous Judge Jeffreys,
hundreds of men were condemned to their death
and the king's popularity in the realm plummeted.
To make matters worse, King James had recently had a son
and shored up his line of succession with a Catholic heir.
Parliament feared a new Catholic line
of succession in England and acted quickly to stop this.
They invited the firmly protestant William
and Mary of Orange from modern day Holland
to take over the English throne from King James II.
Amassing an army,
William led the glorious revolution in 1688,
landing Brixham and deposing King James II unopposed.
The old king fled to France
where he was welcomed by Louis XIV
and given a small court of his own
where he could live out the rest of his days
in quiet and comfort.
(gentle music)
Now, it's important to note that William of Orange
and his wife Mary of England
were by no means usurpers of the English throne.
Mary was actually King James's eldest daughter,
while William was a descendant of Charles I.
This legally meant William and Mary
had as much claim to the throne as, say, James himself.
But bloodlines aside,
what really made the pair such an attractive prospect
was their firm belief in Protestantism.
William of Orange was widely considered
a champion of the faith, having led multiple wars
against the powerful Catholic King Louis XIV
on the continent.
Together with his wife Mary,
they ruled over England together as co-regents,
but in reality, King William spent a majority
of his time in Europe fighting the Nine Years' War.
This left Queen Mary II
to rule over the realm alone in his absence.
She quickly proved to be an exemplary regent,
ruling with a firmness and speed,
all of which made her popular
with her parliament and people.
For the first time since the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
the two governing bodies that ruled over England
enjoyed a period of considerable peace and cooperation.
Parliament was able to pass new bills
and levy taxes with little royal pushback,
and in 1689, they passed the Bill of Rights,
a landmark moment in English history
that forever altered the power of the crown.
It essentially banned all Catholics
from being crown king or queen of England again,
and also barred the regent
from interfering with political matters.
Neither ruler opposed the new bill,
and the power of the English monarch was diminished forever.
Queen Mary died of smallpox in 1694,
leaving King William alone to rule the English kingdom.
Shortly after she passed,
the king was notified of a Jacobite uprising in Scotland
and he led an army north to confront the rebels.
The Jacobites were a group loyal to the deposed James II
and wanted to assassinate King William
and restore James to the English throne.
You see, after the glorious revolution, parliament argued
that King James had forfeited the English throne by fleeing,
leaving room for William to take it,
not by force, but by invitation.
This set a precedent of contract
between the king and their people, where any breach,
in this case, Kings James II fleeing the capital,
could result in the legal deposition of the king
at the hands of the people.
Jacobites staunchly opposed this,
believing that the king was chosen by God as a divine ruler
and could not be removed,
therefore making the post 1668 regime
of King William illegitimate.
The king swiftly crushed the Jacobite rebels,
but their cause had not been defeated,
and they would continue to threaten the crown
for decades to come.
But for now, King William
and the House of Stuarts were secure.
Having had no children and with a death of his nephew,
Prince William, Duke of Gloucester, in 1700,
the issue of succession soon took over
as the main threat to Stuart rule.
Not wanting to give the Jacobites any room to maneuver,
he decided to name Anne,
Queen Mary's sister and daughter of James II,
as the successor to the English throne.
On the 8th of March, 1702,
King William joined his wife in death
after contracting pneumonia,
while he recovered from a broken collarbone
he'd sustained falling off his horse.
His reign had been incredibly stable,
and he was a popular figure in the realm,
both with parliament and the people.
The stability he ushered was a welcome change
as the iron grip of religious tensions appeared
to have relaxed somewhat
and was crowned shortly after his death
and inherited a peaceful, prosperous kingdom.
(uplifting music)
Queen Anne was no stranger to the island
and had already been a notable figure
during the reign of her sister
and brother-in-law before her.
When she came to power herself in 1702,
she had long established herself
within the English upper class and enjoyed popular support
from powerful nobles and politicians alike.
For the first part of her reign,
Queen Anne was under the influence of Sarah,
Duchess of Marlborough, and her husband, John Churchill.
Eventually, though, Queen Anne
and the duchess fell out with one another,
but not before the Churchills rose to prominence
and power in the kingdom.
John Churchill established himself
as a premier naval captain who earned a claim
for his role in the Spanish War of Succession.
The Churchills would continue to play a large role
in English history for the coming generations,
all culminating in their ancestor, Sir Winston Churchill,
leading England through the Second World War.
When we look back at the reign of Queen Anne,
the most enduring and notable part of it
is without a doubt the formation
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain.
While Ireland was subordinate to England
and Wales had long been made a part
of the Kingdom of England,
Scotland was still its own sovereign state.
Queen Anne sought to change that,
expressing her desires to unite the two kingdoms
as early as her coronation speech at Westminster Abbey.
In 1707, she got her wish with the Act of the Union.
The Kingdom of Scotland and the Kingdom of England unified
to form one sovereign state, Great Britain.
A new flag was adopted to symbolize the unity
of the two realms, giving birth to the Union Jack.
Now, unlike her Catholic father, James II,
Anne had been raised Anglican,
and as such, supported policies and policy makers
who shared in her religious views.
She famously favored the Anglican majority Tory party
in government, but faced increasing opposition
from the Whigs who had grown in power
since the War of the Spanish Succession.
Things came to a head in 1710
when she dismissed many Whig politicians from parliament
for their hawkish behavior
and continued insistence on an English presence
in a European war, but the conflict had its upsides.
The English navy had been revitalized
and rebuilt since the early Stuart days,
earning itself a fierce reputation on the high seas
as one of the most formidable navies in the world.
A powerful navy also helped bolster colonial expansion,
as territories in the Americas were quickly developing
into profitable and important territories
thanks to the tobacco farms and growing slave trade.
But while the kingdom flourished,
Queen Anne privately suffered.
She lost her husband, Prince George of Denmark,
only a decade into her reign,
and towards the end of her life,
she suffered from severe ill health.
She gained a lot of weight and had a stroke
that left her without the ability to speak
towards the latter half of her life.
Not long after that, Queen Anne died
on the morning of the 1st of August, 1714.
Her doctors thought that her death was a release
from a life of ill health and tragedy.
Despite 17 pregnancies, none survived, and as such,
Queen Anne had no one to succeed her on the throne.
Because of the ban on Catholic monarchs,
Anne needed to find a suitable Protestant successor.
It was decided that her cousin,
George I of the House of Hanover,
would take over the British crown.
Queen Anne was the last Stuart ruler of England.
(light music)
For the first time since William the Conqueror
almost 700 years ago,
England would again have a truly foreign king
sitting on its throne.
But while the realm welcomed their new Protestant ruler
who had served with distinction
during the Spanish War of Succession,
there was just one glaring issue.
King George I was outrageously unsuited
to rule over the Kingdom of Great Britain.
He didn't speak a word of English.
He was pedantic, decidedly slow
when it came to decision making,
and showed a great disinterest in ruling over the kingdom.
As a result, he passed over the control
and authority of the realm
to a small group of trusted politicians.
This was a role that would later be known
as the prime minister and officially gave birth
to the cabinet system still used in England today.
He was crowned on the 20th of October, 1714,
and before he'd even had time
to learn his councilors names,
he was quickly forced to deal with an old threat up north.
Jacobites had once again landed in Scotland
seeking to overthrow the king
and install James Stuart, son of James II,
as the king of Great Britain.
Like King William before him,
the new King George easily quashed the rebel army,
and James Stuart, later called the Old Pretender,
fled to France, just like his father had.
Meanwhile, back in Westminster, Churchill,
the Duke of Marlborough, had now returned from Spain
and came to the king to cash in his checks.
The War of Spanish Succession had been fought on credit,
with the idea that once it was over,
the English crown would repay Marlborough
for his men and material, but there was just one issue.
The crown was in serious debt,
and in theory, couldn't pay Churchill what he was owed.
King George was himself a big spender,
and famously had a number of mistresses
who abused the court's finances,
racking up huge bills on luxury goods and fine dining.
So King George I and his financial advisors
came up with a plan.
They created the South Sea Company, a shell company,
little more than paper on some clerk's desk,
that would assume the 31 million pound national debt
and turn it into company stock to be sold off to investors.
This would in theory allow the crown to recoup their money
and repay Churchill without bankrupting itself,
but the stock was grossly overinflated
and inevitably it crashed,
bankrupting investors and the government all at once.
Westminster was in disarray.
Lord Stanhope, who was personally innocent
of any wrongdoing, apparently collapsed and died
after a stressful debate on the matter
in the House of Lords.
It was during this time
that Robert Walpole rose to prominence.
His expert management of the crisis
and rescheduling of the debts
allowed the kingdom to return to some financial stability
and saved King George from disgrace.
For his actions, he was promoted
and became England's first defacto prime minister.
In the aftermath of the crisis,
the Bank of England took over in managing the crown
and government funds, a move which eventually led
to England's economy becoming the best managed
in the world over the next century.
However, King George, who was already an unpopular figure,
had become borderline despised
as a result of the South Sea fiasco.
And with the establishment of the office of Prime Minister,
royal power was once again undermined forever.
King George I died from a stroke
while visiting his native Hanover in June 1727.
He is the most recent English king
to be buried outside of Great Britain.
His son, George II, was to take over the throne.
(foreboding music)
George followed in his father's footsteps
as a firmly German English king.
He is the most recent king born outside of England
and chose to spend the majority of his time
as ruler abroad in Hanover,
where he exercised considerably more control
over the running of the realm.
You see, almost all of the domestic running of Great Britain
now fell into the hands of parliament
and the new prime minister,
and King George II grew frustrated
at the lack of influence he had as a royal.
He was able to exercise some control over matters
of international policy and warfare,
but those decisions were few and far between.
One of these moments was the third Jacobite uprising.
Led by the Young Pretender, Bonnie Prince Charles,
another son of the former James II,
the Jacobite rebels amassed support in Scotland
and marched South in English territory,
hoping to depose the Hanoverian monarchy.
Charles Stuart had hoped that upon his arrival in England,
he would be flooded with popular support
and easily overpower the unpopular Hanoverian king,
but he was wrong.
While his army was able to get as far south as Derby,
they were plagued by indecisive leadership
and failed to gather any support in the realm.
Fearing a retaliation from the king,
Charles Stuart retreated back to Scotland
where he prepared to face King George's troops.
At the Battle of Culloden in 1745, the final Jacobite stand
would be slaughtered by William, Duke of Cumberland,
on behalf of the British crown.
The fighting was brutal,
and William gave his men orders to spare no one,
not even the wounded.
Charles escaped the slaughter, making his way back to France
where he lived out the last of his days a drunkard.
The Scottish nobles who had supported the Jacobites
were mercilessly rounded up and executed.
It was so brutal that Cumberland earned himself the nickname
Butcher Cumberland for his actions north of the border.
But the revolt had been quashed,
and finally the Jacobite threat had been silenced forever.
The uprisings give us a unique look
into how life during King George's reign was perceived.
Life was good, placid, and peaceful,
and it was clear that there was no genuine animosity
for the king as exhibited by the lack of popular support
the uprisings garnered.
While the king was by no means popular,
there was little incentive to depose him.
The everyday running of the realm
was firmly in the hands of parliament,
and a new king was not likely to change that,
and this domestic comfort was very much a side effect
of Britain's growing international successes.
The East India Trading Company
that had been set up almost 100 years before
defeated a combined army of French and Indian troops
on the Indian subcontinent,
earning themselves a total monopoly in the region.
Elsewhere, the Seven Years' War was raging,
with fighting taking place as far away as the new world
and the first truly global conflict.
Britain was ultimately victorious against the French,
gaining new territories in Canada, Florida, Granada,
Senegal, and east of the Mississippi.
Great Britain was beginning to emerge
as the most dominant force, not just in Europe,
but on the entire planet.
King George II lived to be 77 years old,
then the oldest ruler in the nation's history,
but by the end of his life,
he was completely deaf and blind in one eye,
and as a result, spent much of his time bedbound and unwell.
He died on the 25th of October, 1760
after collapsing near his closed stool,
a precursor to the modern toilet.
Because his eldest son, Frederick, Prince of Wales,
had died suddenly in 1751,
succession was passed onto Frederick's son, George III.
Despite England enjoying a period of remarkable growth
and expansion abroad, opening new museums
and extinguishing long standing threats,
King George was remembered by his contemporaries
as a buffoon ruled by wives and ministers.
He was considered an inept ruler,
and subsequent memoirs all painted an image of a king
engorged on pleasure and drink.
But had they known who was to come next,
the buffoon and his wife
might not have been treated so harshly after all.
(uplifting music)
There was no way to know that the reign of King George III
was to be one of the most tumultuous
and eventful in English history.
Domestically, internationally, and personally,
George III faced pressure and conflict at every turn.
Crowned on the 22nd of September, 1761,
King George III differed from his grandfather
and great-grandfather in the sense
that he was more English than they ever were.
He was born on the island, spoke the language,
and spent his formative years
learning in the British Kingdom.
Those who hoped this would make him a more capable regent
were quickly brought back to reality.
King George III would frequently become afflicted
with bouts of debilitating madness,
rendering him incapable of ruling
and sending Westminster into disarray.
This earned the king the nickname Mad King George,
and there were many attempts by parliament
to install his son, the Prince of Wales, to the throne,
but every time they tried,
King George would regain his senses and resume his rule
before any permanent decisions had been made.
His early rule was defined mainly by conflict,
both at home and abroad.
The American War of Independence
was won by the colonists in 1783,
severing the Americas from the British control forever
and giving birth to the United States of America
as an independent nation.
Closer to home, King George was forced to deal
with the Gordon Riots of 1780,
where a mob of protestors rioted
against the specter of Catholic emancipation
and left the city looted and burnt
after three days of violence.
Before that, in 1799, the United Irishmen rebelled
on behalf of the Irish people
and demanded Irish autonomy from Great Britain.
They were easily defeated at Vinegar Hill,
and two years later, Ireland was officially unified
into the Kingdom of Great Britain,
forming the United Kingdom that still stands today.
But framing all this was the Napoleonic Wars.
A Corsican in general with a skill for warfare
and lofty ambitions had quickly come to dominate Europe,
plunging the continent into a state of perpetual warfare.
Fighting was sporadic,
and a number of coalitions were formed
to try and defeat the pint size general.
British naval victories in the Nile and at Trafalgar
earned the United Kingdom a reputation
as the fiercest navy in the world,
while the land war in Spain decisively pushed Napoleon
out of the Iberian Peninsula.
Britain was eventually victorious at Waterloo,
marking the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
Historians often cite this as the moment
Britain became the most dominant power in the world.
Under George III, the early industrial revolution also began
as steam engines were introduced to the British workforce.
Protests against these new machines were common
and culminated in the Luddite protest
where farm workers broke into factories
and smashed up the machinery
for taking their jobs away from them.
The rapid changes in the workforce
alongside the economic disaster that was the Napoleonic Wars
meant that social unrest in Britain was at an all time high.
Mass unemployment, depression, and civil unrest ran rampant,
and the king's response was to ruthlessly quash dissent,
usually by force.
And keep in mind, during all this,
King George would often descend
into crippling bouts of madness,
leaving the realm without its figurehead
for months at a time.
In 1810, parliament had had enough.
It was clear that George could no longer rule,
and it was decided that his son, George IV,
would take over his regent in his place.
King George lived for another 10 years
while his son ruled in his place.
When he died age 81 in 1820, he was the longest reigning
and longest living British monarch in history.
To this day,
he's still the oldest reigning male king of England.
(foreboding music)
George, Prince of Wales,
or Prinny, as he was known to those closest to him,
had already been ruling over Britain as regent since 1810,
but after the death of his father in 1820,
he ascended to the throne as King George IV.
Following in his father's footstep,
King George IV was known as an impulsive, extravagant,
and morally dubious man who enjoyed the finer things in life
and behaved in a way that was all together unkingly.
He had the brightened pavilion built
as an homage to East Asia right here on the English coast.
Its gaudy and lavish design was polarizing at the time,
but it has since become a national treasure.
He remodeled Buckingham Palace and rebuilt Windsor Castle
to reflect the splendor and power of the English crown.
On a personal level, King George was known
for being something of a ladies man.
Now, while having multiple mistresses wasn't uncommon,
it was his behavior with them
that earned him the scorn of his cabinet.
One, a lady, Mrs. Fitzherbert,
was said to have married the king in secret,
and a tunnel from Brighton Pavilion
leads directly into her home nearby.
As a prince, King George earned himself a reputation
as an extremely charming and cultured man.
He is often remembered as the first gentleman of England,
but faced an increasingly hostile public
after his ascension to the throne.
Crowned on the 19th of July, 1821,
there was drama on the day of his coronation
as the new king attempted to have his wife,
Caroline of Brunswick, barred from the ceremony.
He then petitioned parliament
for help in getting a divorce.
Under British law, a divorce could only be granted
on the grounds of adultery.
Since neither King George
or Caroline would admit to that, the king got creative.
He tried to pass the Bill of Pains and Penalties,
essentially a public trial that accused his wife of adultery
and planned to use parliament as his judge and jury
to get a divorce and deny Caroline her right
as queen of England.
The debate was heavily reported in the press,
and public opposition to the bill was high.
It eventually passed, but only just,
and as public unrest towards the bill grew,
the government decided to withdraw the bill
in an effort to save the reputation of the royal crown,
but the damage had been done.
The court of King George IV
developed a reputation for extravagance and scandal.
George was himself an impulsive and unreliable statesman
who frequently behaved selfishly
and drew the ire of many in his cabinet.
The king's power continued to diminish,
and George was forced to accept Catholic emancipation,
a reversal of many of the anti-Catholic legislation
that had been passed since the reign of Henry VIII,
despite being staunchly opposed to it.
Catholics were once again given the right to vote,
hold public office, and sit in parliament.
It was also during the reign of King George IV
that the first regular police force in London
was established by Robert Peel,
but a life of overindulgence and grandeur
had its toll on the king.
By the time he ascended to the throne,
he had gained so much weight
that he was the subject of much ridicule
during public appearances.
He reached a whopping 17 stone, or 108 kilograms,
and after a decade on the throne,
his lifestyle had caught up to him.
King George IV died on the 26th of June, 1830,
surrounded by servants and cabinet members.
A senior aide to the king privately confided in his diary,
"A more contemptible, cowardly, selfish,
unfeeling dog does not exist.
There have been good and wise kings, but not many of them,
and this I believe to be one of the worst."
As his only legitimate child had died a few years prior,
the throne was to be given
to his younger brother, William Henry.
(light music)
Nicknamed the Sailor King,
William had spent the majority of his life at sea
as part of the Royal Navy.
He had been made lord high admiral in 1827
and inherited his brother's throne
at the sprightly age of 64.
Crowned on the 8th of September, 1831,
King William's comparatively shored reign
was nonetheless highly transformative to British society.
The poor laws were updated and streamlined,
centralizing their administrative function
and establishing workhouses across the country.
Many of these reforms set as a precedent
for the modern welfare system still used in Britain today.
Meanwhile, child labor,
which had been allowed to run rampant
and unchecked since the start of the Industrial Revolution,
was officially banned, thanks to the Factory Act of 1833.
King William also oversaw the passing
of the Slave Abolition Act that same year,
banning slavery in all its forms across the British Empire.
It's worth noting, however,
that the king was staunch anti-abolition
and campaigned against the passing of the bill.
Despite this, the new king was far less involved in politics
than his brother and father before him.
The crown's political influence had diminished
past the point of no return.
And after his failure to remove the Melbourne ministry,
he resigned himself to matters away from politics
for the remainder of his reign.
He would be the last king to select a prime minister
against the wishes of parliament.
But away from the chatter and dealings of Westminster,
King William's personal life
was much more under his control.
He was in a 20 year long partnership
with Irish actress, Dorothea Bland,
with whom he had 10 children, five boys and five girls.
The pair appeared to have enjoyed each other's company
as evident by their extended courtship
and drama-free years together.
William's father, King George III,
was supportive of his son's relationship
and bestowed onto William the title of Ranger of Bushy Park,
a role which included a large residence
known as Bushy House on the outskirts of London.
But Dorothea Bland would never be queen
as the pair split in 1811.
Bland was given custody of the five girls
and paid a monthly sum for their upkeep
under the condition that she never returned to the stage.
She, however, did return to acting,
hoping to earn some extra money to pay off a debt
one of her daughter's husbands had incurred.
When news reached William,
he stopped paying her monthly allowance,
and she eventually fled to France to avoid the debtors
who she'd failed to pay off.
She died impoverished in 1816.
Just a few years later, William searched for a proper wife
concluded with his marriage to Adelaide of Saxe-Meiningen.
She was of royal stock in her prime childbearing years,
and it's reported that she and William
became extremely fond of one another.
This luck continued well into kingship,
as William proved himself to be an expert diplomat,
especially on the international stage.
He oversaw the initial phases
of the construction of the Suez Canal
and stressed the importance of its ability
to garner good relations between the British crown in Egypt.
He also helped repair Britain's relationship with America,
which had suffered immensely under King George III.
At a dinner party with the American ambassador,
King William loudly proclaimed his regret
for not being born a free independent American.
So much did he respect that nation
which had given birth to George Washington,
the greatest man that ever lived.
Anglo American relations steadily improved under his rule,
and the two nations are still close to this day.
But for all his charm and diplomatic tact,
he and Adelaide had no surviving children,
and as such, King William was presented
with a succession crisis towards the end of his life.
The king was extremely fond of his niece,
Princess Alexandrina Victoria of Kent,
and named her as his heir during his final birthday banquet.
By this time, the king was gravely ill,
but wanted to survive to see his niece turn 18,
ensuring that the crown was passed directly to her
and not placed under a regency council
as was custom for under eighteens.
His last year alive was a torturous one.
Princess Adelaide reportedly stayed by his side,
refusing to go to bed for 10 days as his health worsened.
King William IV died in the early hours
of the 20th of June, 1837.
He was the last Hanoverian king to rule over England.
(light music)
At just 18 years old, Victoria found herself
at the head of the greatest empire the world had ever seen.
As it was against Hanoverian law
for a woman to rule over the province,
the new queen was stripped of a role
as ruler of the Kingdom of Hanover.
However, by now, Britain had emerged
as the most dominant superpower on the planet.
Under her rule, the empire would reach its territorial peak,
controlling 35.5 million square kilometers.
It was and still stands
as the largest empire ever seen in human history.
On the 28th of June, 1838,
400,000 people traveled to the capital
to see Victoria ascend to the British throne.
She became the first monarch
to take up permanent residence at Buckingham Palace,
which has since become the administrative
and a residential headquarters
for the royal family in England.
But the cheer and pomp soon faded,
and the start of her reign was fraught
with social tension and conflict in the realm.
There had been a widespread demand for electoral reform
and calls for universal male suffrage ran across the kingdom
as ordinary men demanded the right to vote.
There were also calls to abolish the Corn Law,
which heavily taxed imported grains
and barley that came into the island.
In 1846, the Corn Laws were repealed and free trade won out,
greatly improving the standard of living,
and contributing to a Victorian era boom in population.
Unlike her uncle William,
Queen Victoria sought to involve herself in politics
far more than she really should have.
Because of the laws that prohibited the English monarch
from meddling in political matters, she had to get creative.
The queen attempted to influence government outcome
and ministerial policy through private meetings
and backroom dealings,
something she quickly developed a talent for.
As an astute diplomat, she knew how to conduct herself
in the murky political world of Victorian England,
and as such, was far more successful
in influencing the decision-making processes
of parliament and her lords.
However, she publicly maintained her image as a busy
and charitable monarch who directly involved herself
in a number of public works projects.
Under her husband's patronage,
the first World Fair was held in London in 1851.
Prince Albert directly oversaw the construction
of the Crystal Palace, which stood in Sydenham
until it burned down, and welcomed exhibits
from all over the empire in a show of unity and strength.
But while the World Fair may have bolstered these ideas
of togetherness at home,
the reality of things was very different.
In 1857, the Crimean War broke out
as a result of growing tensions on the continent
between emerging superpowers and old empires in the east.
Britain chose to fight for the Ottomans against Russia,
wanting to maintain the balance of power in Europe
and limit Russian expansion.
Despite the war's unpopularity at home,
Britain and her allies were eventually victorious,
and Europe was once again stable,
but before any celebrations could be had,
the Indian mutiny called the army's attention once more
and resulted in the British
taking complete administrative control
over the sub-continent of India.
As a result, Queen Victoria
officially became Victoria, Empress of India.
Previously, the Indian government
had worked alongside the British East India Company
in the day-to-day ruling of the region.
However, after the mutineers were put down
and the rebellion quashed,
the British government ousted both the Indians
and the East India Company
from their administrative positions
and took control for themselves.
During a proclamation to the Indian people,
the queen promised her new subjects rights and freedoms
equal to that of the British public.
These rights were not always maintained,
and her proclamation was referred to many times
during the long fight for Indian independence.
Back in London, Queen Victoria
and Prince Albert had been steadily reproducing,
giving birth to a total of nine children,
all of whom married into European royal families.
This earned the queen the nickname
the Grandmother of Europe.
The death of Albert in 1860 devastated Victoria,
who fell into a prolonged period of mourning.
The previously active monarch
was seldom seen by her cabinet,
and for a time disappeared completely from the public stage.
In her absence, British republicanism grew,
and there were real murmurs in the capital
of a potential revolution against the royal institutions,
but these amounted to nothing.
She would've eventually compose herself
and resume a life in the public eye, but continued to mourn,
wearing black until the day she died.
The queen ruled for 40 more years without her prince,
and in that time, her kingdom erupted
as a center of industry, art, and science in the world.
Factories dominated the landscape from London to Glasgow,
as new cities tripled in size.
Places like Birmingham and Manchester,
which had before only been minor villages and settlements,
were now the second and third largest cities in the country.
Great writers produced some of their finest works.
Bram Stoker wrote "Dracula,"
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle wrote "Sherlock Holmes,"
and Charles Dickens published some of the greatest works
of literary fiction
in the English language since Shakespeare.
Advancements in science and medicine
also progressed massively under her rule.
Darwin published his theories on the evolution of man,
Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone,
and germ theory became the leading idea that pushes medicine
and the prevention of disease forwards.
After King George III, Queen Victoria stands
as the second longest reigning monarch in British history.
Her golden and diamond jubilees
were a time of great celebration,
and her 63 year reign remains an iconic chapter
in British history, referred to as the Victorian era.
In 1901 while on a trip to Osborne house
in the Isle of Wight,
Queen Victoria died from a stroke at 81 years of age.
Her death marked the end of the House of Hanover
and its rule on the British Isles.
With the throne now passed onto her son, Edward,
Britain had to leave its ancient queen behind
as it ran headfirst into the modern age.
Perhaps if it knew what that meant,
it might not have done so as willingly.
(dramatic music)
As the first of the modern monarchs of Britain,
King Edward VII exemplified many of the tropes
and ideas we associate with the royal family today.
Throughout his time as the prince of Wales
and later as king, he traveled extensively
throughout the country and the world,
performing traditional ceremonies to the public
and acting as a figurehead to institutions and charities.
King Edward oversaw the crown shift
to being a vehicle for public philanthropy
as he opened new bridges, schools, and hospitals
in an effort to modernize the role of the royal family.
Since monarchical influence in politics
was now legally prohibited,
King Edward took a leaf out of his mother's book
and took to the shadows to impose his will.
He reinvented royal diplomacy, fostering good relations
with many of the powerful elite in Europe,
most notably the French, for whom he was called Peacemaker,
but he was not always successful in these endeavors.
He married Alexandra of Denmark in 1863,
and together they had six children.
Like in the reign of his mother,
King Edward ruled over an island that was rapidly changing.
Scientific and technological advancements
doubled year on year as man took flight.
Wireless signals were sent across the Atlantic,
and the South Pole was reached by humans
for the first time in human history.
But for all its developments in science and culture,
the Edwardian era is best remembered
for the rise of socialism.
All across the world, the working classes
had benefited from increased education and literacy,
and as such, at the start of the century,
a huge number of poor British subjects had become educated
and increasingly vocal about their rights as humans.
Murmurs of independence rang throughout Britain's colonies,
and strong attempts were made
to erode the longstanding class divides
that had kept hold in England
since the reign of King Egbert, all those years before.
At the time of his death in 1910,
King Edward VII faced a constitutional crisis
spurred on by socialism and its ideals.
A year prior, the Liberal Party
had enacted the People's Budget, an unprecedented set
of new taxes against the richest in the realm
that was intended
to help fund social housing projects across Britain.
The House of Commons passed it,
but when it came to the House of Lords,
an unelected council who sit for life, it was vetoed.
Technically speaking, the House of Lords
had every right to do this.
But there had been a longstanding honor code
between the two branches of government
that essentially said the House of Lords
was not supposed to amend money bills,
as only the House of Commons had the power to decide
on the monarch's resources.
Their block of the bill, while not illegal,
was in bad spirit, and further emphasized
the growing social divide in the kingdom.
Many in parliament believed their system of government
needed to be reformed.
It was under this unrest that King Edward VII died
on the 6th of May, 1910.
He left the throne to his son, George,
who was to inherit not just a fractured kingdom,
but a planet on the verge of tearing itself apart.
(light music)
But before he was accosted by arms, races,
and constitutional crises, George was a young man
who was not always meant to be king.
The second son of King Edward,
he spent his youth serving abroad in the Royal Navy,
enjoying his freedom and a reveling in the life of a prince.
However, fate had other plans for him,
and after his brother and the heir to the British throne,
Prince Albert, died unexpectedly in 1892,
George was hurriedly recalled to Britain
to begin a life of preparation
and education to eventually ascend to the British throne.
He married his brother's fiance,
Princess Victoria, Mary of Teck,
and together the pair had six children.
In 1910 with a passing of his father,
George was crowned king emperor of the United Kingdom
on the 22nd of June to joyous celebrations in the capital.
The constitutional crisis
that had defined the end of his father's reign
was quickly dealt with thanks to the Parliament Act of 1911,
which saw the House of Commons
establish legal supremacy over the House of Lords.
England itself was experiencing a period
of civil unrest and social upheaval.
The socialist ideals that had been gaining popularity
now had Europe in a vice grip.
Irish politicians began calling for home rule
and separation from the British Kingdom,
while socialist politicians grew in numbers, power,
and ambition within the House of Commons.
But all this turmoil was about to take a back seat
as Europe erupted into warfare.
The First World War had begun.
On the 4th of August, 1914,
four years after his coronation,
King George V declared war on Germany.
On the day of the declaration, the king wrote in his diary,
"I held a council at 10:45 to declare war with Germany.
It is a terrible catastrophe, but it is not our fault.
Please to God, it may soon be over."
It was not, and the war raged for four years,
as England and her allies battled
against the central powers.
It was a conflict that would claim the lives
of around 40 million people
with fighting happening all over the world.
The new machines which had taken society into the modern age
now brought death on an industrial scale,
and the war had a profound impact on the British psyche,
inflicting scars that to this day have yet to heal.
Even the king could not escape this.
To him, the war was personal.
The Russian czar and the German kaiser were his cousins
as they shared ancestry to Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
The men had grown up together,
spending summers at Buckingham Palace playing make believe
and fighting in homemade trenches in the palace gardens.
Now, their countries played out these childhood fantasies
with unforgiving brutality.
Consequently, the English King George
still carried a German surname, Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
As anti-German sentiment skyrocketed,
the king drew ire for his perceived connections
to their new enemy.
Famous English writer, HG Wells,
wrote about Britain's alien and uninspiring court
in reference to the king.
George responded to the author,
"I may be uninspiring, but I'll be damned if I'm alien."
To appease British nationalists,
King George V changed his surname
from the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha
to the House of Windsor on the 17th of July, 1917.
That same year, the Russians who had allied with Britain
during the conflict had capitulated,
and Russia was overcome with fervor of revolution.
The downtrodden Russian people
overthrew the czar and his family,
imprisoning him and establishing the Soviet Union.
Not only was the czar King George's cousin,
but the two were dear friends, and George made plans
to rescue his cousin from the revolutionaries
that had arrested him and his family.
But that same fervor that had led to revolution in Russia
was beginning to bubble in Britain.
Compounding social issues
had decreased the quality of life in the country so much
that there was a genuine fear of revolution
similar to that of the Russian communists.
King George worried that bringing the Romanovs
who represented all the gaudy excesses
and societal disconnect between a king and his people
would look bad on the British crown.
Czar Nicholas and his family
were gunned down by the revolutionaries,
and Russia would never have a king again.
By 1918, the war was over, the armistice was signed,
and Germany sent their kaiser into exile.
Of the great European monarchies, only a few now stood.
King George was alone.
The later half of George's reign was dominated
by the growing threat of socialism and its offshoots.
Fascism, republicanism, communism,
these political ideologies grew in popularity
and promised the working classes of the world
a chance at retribution and equality.
The world had seen what communists were capable of
during the Russian Revolution,
and anti-communist sentiment perforated
throughout the British upper class.
The socialist labor movement
had gained massive popularity in parliament,
but instead of an all-out revolt like in Russia,
they sought to work alongside the king
to introduce more democratic measures to the island.
The king submitted to their demands,
and together they revamped the role of the British monarchy,
bringing it closer to the public and the working class.
In 1926, King George became a central figure
in the push for self-governance in the British dominions.
In 1931, the statute of Westminster gave territories
like Australia and Canada greater autonomy
and self-governance,
while still keeping them firmly under the British crown.
The king also oversaw Britain's financial recovery
after the 1929 stock market crash.
He encouraged the formation of a national government
and agreed to reduce the civil list,
essentially lowering the number of people
on the government's payroll.
All of this helped in stabilizing the economy,
and as a result, Britain was able to maintain peace
and a basic standard of living
during a time when the entire world
was reeling from economic hardship.
He was deeply suspicious of the Nazi party,
which had been rising in power in Germany
following the First World War.
In 1934, he told the German ambassador Leopold von Hoesch
that should Germany continue on its current trajectory,
there would be a war in Europe once again
in the next 10 years.
He was wrong, but only just.
In 1935, a year before his death,
George celebrated his silver jubilee
to cheering crowds in the capital.
He was a popular and well loved king.
The people respected him for his hard work
and commitment to the empire,
as well as his charity and care to the British public.
As crowds waved him on, he reportedly said,
"I cannot understand it.
After all, I'm only a very ordinary sort of fellow."
His relationship with his eldest son, Edward,
deteriorated towards the end of his life,
as he grew increasingly disappointed
at Edward's inability to settle down
and his continued affairs with married women.
In contrast, he was deeply close to his second son Albert
and became a dotting grandfather
to Albert's daughter, Prince Elizabeth,
who referred to him as Grandpa England.
In 1935, he said this of his eldest son, Edward.
"After I am dead, the boy will ruin himself
within 12 months.
I pray to God he does not marry and have children,
and that nothing stands in the way of Bertie
and Lilibet and the throne."
On the evening of the 15th of January, 1936,
King George took to his bedroom complaining of a cold.
He never reemerged.
Five days later when it was clear the king was going to die,
his physician administered a mild sedative,
intending to peacefully end the king's life.
He argued that he wanted to preserve the monarch's dignity
and spare him and his family any more suffering.
It was decided that he would be killed by 11:55 PM
to ensure that the news broke in time for the morning papers
and not the less inappropriate evening journals.
Against the king's personal wishes,
the British crown was passed on to his eldest son,
Edward, Prince of Wales.
(uplifting music)
As the second monarch of the House of Windsor,
there were many in the kingdom
who hoped that the crown would prove a stabilizing influence
on the eccentric Prince Edward.
It did not.
The new king showed great impatience
at following royal protocol and caused major concern
amongst the political factions of Westminster
for his complete disregard
for established constitutional conventions.
He caused a serious constitutional crisis
only a month into his rule
after he proposed to marry Wallis Simpson,
an American woman who had divorced twice already.
The British prime minister himself opposed the marriage,
arguing that a twice divorced woman
with two living husbands was not a politically
or socially acceptable person to have as queen consort.
Furthermore, his proposed marriage
would jeopardize his position
as the head of the Church of England,
which forbade marrying a divorcee
if their ex-partner was still alive.
It became clear that if king went through
with the marriage to Wallis, the prime minister
and his cabinet would retire and protest.
This was serious, as it would ruin his status
as a politically neutral monarch
and could potentially draw opposition
calling for the total removal
of the royal institution as a whole.
King Edward would have to choose between love or duty.
He chose love.
After only 326 days on the throne,
King Edward VIII abdicated.
Unknowingly, he had given his late father
the very thing he had wished for.
Prince Albert now would be king of Britain and her empire.
(ethereal music)
Upon his secession to the throne,
Prince Albert chose to adopt regnal name
and was thereafter known as King George VI.
He was crowned on the 12th of May, 1937 to much popularity,
but behind the scenes,
the smiling king rejected his new position.
He wrote in his diary that after hearing the news
of his brother's decision to abdicate,
he broke down and wept like a child.
Rumors spread across the country that the new King George
was physically and mentally unfit to rule.
This is in some ways true.
King George had a speech impediment and a stutter,
not the kind of trade you want
when you need to portray yourself as a strong figurehead.
He frequently saw a speech therapist
who was able to coach the king
through his public engagements,
and in all surviving recordings of the king,
there is almost no noticeable stammer to be heard.
- The queen and I are very happy
to be in Scotland once more.
- [Instructor] During the first years of his reign,
King George toured in North America
in an effort to bring the isolated Americans closer
to the issues in Europe.
You see, King George, along with the rest of Europe,
knew that war was imminent.
He was forced to publicly support
British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's
policy of appeasement, even bringing the prime minister
onto the balcony of Buckingham Palace
in an extraordinary show of unity.
But it was increasingly clear
that peace in our time wasn't going to last very long.
The king was well received in the US,
and he was successful in shoring up American support
in any upcoming conflicts.
War broke out in Europe in 1939 after Hitler invaded Poland
and prompted Britain to respond in the defense of her ally.
Throughout the conflict,
the king and queen decided to stay
at the royal residence of Buckingham Palace
as a sign of unity and solidarity with the English people,
a decision that made them wildly popular.
As London suffered through the blitz,
the king and queen hunkered down,
narrowly escaping death themselves
as two German bombs landed in the palace gardens one night.
They were subject to British rationing restrictions,
just like everyone else,
and were looked at around the world as model rulers
who shared in their subject's suffering.
His daughter, Princess Elizabeth, even enlisted in the army,
mending Jeeps as part of the auxiliary territorial service.
Unsurprisingly, Neville Chamberlain
lost the ensuing election
and Winston Churchill took over as prime minister.
While King George was initially hesitant of Churchill,
the two quickly developed the closest personal relationship
in modern British history
between a monarch and a prime minister.
Every Tuesday for four and a half years,
the two men met to privately eat dinner
and discuss the war with unparalleled frankness.
In the meantime, the king and queen
would regularly make visits to bombed out houses
and factories around the country,
boosting morale as they went.
King George even visited the army in France, Italy,
North Africa, and Holland,
and the British king became a symbol
of national resistance across the globe.
In 1945, the war was over.
Guns ceased to fire and bombs stopped being dropped.
Britain and her allies had won.
During celebrations,
crowds gathered outside Buckingham Palace chanting,
"We want the king."
King George gave them what they wanted,
and echoing his actions almost six years ago,
he brought Prime Minister Churchill
onto the balcony to join him.
This time, however, peace would last.
King George even spoke at the first assembly
of the United Nations,
which was held in London a year later.
But while the war had strengthened his popularity at home,
it had come at a monumental cost.
Britain and her empire was in ruins.
Financially, the fighting had destroyed large portions
of England and her factories.
While the Lend-Lease program had put the country
in unimaginable amounts of debt with the US,
abroad, the many arms of the empire
that had fought for the British crown
now demanded independence.
There had already been a move
into recognizing some of Britain's overseas territories
as independent dominions, like Canada and Australia.
But after the war, there was a clear shift
towards recognizing all her territories
as independent states.
As colonial sentiment diminished,
the British Empire was renamed and reorganized
into the commonwealth of nations.
Some stayed, while many chose
to fully separate from the British crown.
King George was named as head of the New Commonwealth,
and as such, nations like Canada, Belize, Jamaica,
Australia, and New Zealand still recognize the king
as their head of state, but others sought full independence.
India became a republic,
while the nations of Bangladesh and Pakistan were formed
during the British split from the subcontinent.
Britain and her territory shrink
and the empire where the sun never set was no more.
But while the world celebrated peace,
the king battled with the personal toll of the war.
He was a heavy smoker
and subsequently developed lung cancer
alongside a laundry list of other ailments,
and the stress of the conflict
pushed his ill health over the edge.
His later years saw his daughter, Elizabeth,
take over in many of the royal duties
he could no longer attend.
On the 31st of January, 1953,
King George made the trip to London airport,
despite the advice of those closest to him,
to see off Princess Elizabeth
and her husband Philip Mountbatten
as they embarked on a royal tour to Australia.
It was his last public appearance.
Six days later, King George VI
was found dead in bed at Sandringham Castle at 56 years old.
He was buried at St. George's Chapel at Windsor Castle.
Upon hearing the news of her father's death,
Princess Elizabeth returned to England
and took her place in history.
(gentle music)
At 25 years of age, Princess Elizabeth
ascended to the British throne, becoming Queen Elizabeth II.
It was the first televised coronation ceremony
in British history,
and over 100 million people tuned in worldwide to watch it.
Prior to this, though, drama had already been brewing
close to the new queen.
There was the issue of the royal house,
which needed to be sorted prior to her ascension.
It was custom for the royal house
to take after the husband's name,
which in this case was House Mountbatten
after her husband Philip.
The queen, however, had other ideas.
She issued a declaration a month before the coronation
stating that the royal house would go on as is,
maintaining the name House Windsor.
Philip complained telling people,
"I am the only man in the country
not allowed to give his name to his own children."
Resentment against his role as royal consort
would dominate the early years of their marriage,
but Philip soon grew to be a loyal,
comforting, and dutiful partner to the queen.
Immediately after her coronation,
Elizabeth and her husband embarked on a seven month tour
of the newly established commonwealth of nations.
She was the first reigning monarch of Australia
and New Zealand to visit those nations.
And it's estimated that half of the Australian population
came out to see the queen on her state visit.
Throughout her life, she traveled extensively
around the world, and by the end,
she was the most widely traveled head of state in history.
She was the first British monarch
to visit a communist country,
visiting Yugoslavia in the '70s,
and her visit to the People's Republic of China in the '80s
was the first state visit by a British monarch to China
in the two countries millennia long history.
But once she had returned from her tour
and was once again back in Westminster,
the queen saw the political power
of the monarchy diminish once again.
You see, the ruling conservative party
had no formal system for choosing a leader.
So after the resignation of Anthony Eden as Prime Minister,
the burden fell to Queen Elizabeth
to decide who would form the next government.
She met with a small number
of council members and politicians
and appointed their recommended candidate, Harold Macmillan.
This, alongside the failure of the Suez Crisis,
would earn the queen
her first bit of major personal criticism.
Lord Altrincham accused Elizabeth of being out of touch
in a magazine which he owned and edited.
This led to Altrincham being denounced by public figures
and slapped by a member of the public
for his comments against the queen.
Six years later, Macmillan himself retired
and the queen was once again tasked
with choosing a replacement.
She selected Alec Douglas-Home as Prime Minister,
but again drew criticism from making her decision
based on a small number of close advisors.
In 1965, the Conservative Party
established a formal mechanism for choosing their leader,
and the queen's direct involvement in politics was gone,
but a further loss of political power
was just the beginning.
The process of decolonization that had begun in earnest
during her father's reign had sped up in recent years.
Africa rapidly shed the colonial shackles
that Britain had imposed on her
as 20 African nations gained full independence
throughout the 1960s and '70s.
As her power overseas weakened,
Britain sought to join the European Community,
a precursor to the European Union,
a goal that achieved in 1973.
There was great concern during this time
about the power and influence of the crown,
especially amongst her dominions.
Australian Republicanism was on the rise,
and Canada's prime minister, Pierre Trudeau,
seemed to wholly disregard the reagent and her importance,
sliding down the banisters at Buckingham Palace
and pirouetting behind the queen's back
during a state visit to London.
A few years later when Canadian politicians
were sent to London to discuss the patriation
of the Canadian constitution,
they found Queen Elizabeth to be better informed
than any of the British politicians and bureaucrats.
Canada would get its independence in 1982,
but the queen maintained her role as their head of state.
She suffered great embarrassment
when the surveyor of the queen's pictures, Anthony Blunt,
was unmasked as a communist spy, and during the '80s,
numerous attempts at her life were made,
none proving successful,
but each growing in danger and intensity.
During a Trooping of the Color in 1981,
six shots were fired at the queen in close range
as she rode her horse down the mall in London.
That October, during a state visit to New Zealand,
a 17-year-old Christopher John Lewis
fired a shot from a 22 rifle at the queen
as she stepped out of her vehicle.
A year later, an intruder broke into Buckingham Palace
and sat watching the queen sleep.
When she awoke, the two calmly chatted
while Elizabeth waited for palace police to arrive.
In all instances, the queen escaped harm.
Throughout all this, she had managed to endear herself
to the public, showing immense poise and grace
during each and every attempt on her life.
Royal popularity was relatively high,
but the 1990s would prove to be a difficult decade
for not just the queen,
but the monarchical institution as a whole.
During a speech to mark her ruby jubilee,
the queen commented on her annus horribilis,
or horrible year, in 1992.
Many of her children had suffered
highly public breakdowns in their marriages.
Prince Andrew had separated from his wife Sarah,
while Princess Anne had officially divorced
Captain Mark Phillips.
But the biggest blow to royal popularity
came with her eldest son, Prince Charles,
and his now estranged wife Diana.
On the 7th of June, Diana published
her tell-all memoir, "Diana: The True Story,"
revealing all the problems in her marriage
and the stifling atmosphere of the royal family.
It went into sorted detail
about Charles's affair with Camilla Parker Bowles
and made Diana incredibly popular with the public,
all while bringing down the reputation of the crown
and besmirching the heir to the British throne.
A fire broke out in Buckingham Palace
in November of that year, and it was under all these events
and more that the queen remarked, "1992 is not a year
on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure.
In the words of one of my more sympathetic correspondence,
it has turned out to be an annus horribilis."
The '90s saw the crown combat the rise
of tabloid journalism.
Sensational headlines and growing personal dramas
made the royal family a frequent front page presence.
In 1997, Diana, who by now
had officially separated from Charles,
died in a high speed car crash in France
after being followed by paparazzi.
The queen took her young grandchildren to Balmoral Castle
so that the young boys could grieve in private
away from the intense media coverage.
But the crown silence and seclusion
led to a wave of public outrage.
Later, rumors would arise
that the queen had ordered Diana's death,
but these claims are unsubstantiated,
and a toxicology report on the driver showed he was drunk
at the time of the accident.
Before the end of the century,
the queen would play an integral part
in the devolution of the UK parliament,
formally opening the new legislatures in Wales and Scotland.
In 2002, she celebrated her golden jubilee
to enormous crowds that surprised even the queen herself.
A decade later, she would see the same crowds
celebrating her diamond jubilee.
That summer, the queen opened the 2012 Olympic Games,
becoming the first head of state
to open two Olympic ceremonies
after her role in the 1972 Montreal Olympics.
But as she crept steadily into old age,
the well-traveled and beloved queen began to slow down.
She had a number of surgeries and minor health scares,
and officially gave up driving on public roads
after an accident involving her husband in 2019.
In September, 2015, Queen Elizabeth II
became the longest reigning monarch in British history,
overtaking Queen Victoria who had ruled over 150 years ago.
A few years later, she became the first British monarch
to celebrate a sapphire jubilee,
as well as a platinum wedding anniversary to Philip.
She was present at the marriage of her grandson,
an eventual heir to the throne,
Prince William and Kate Middleton,
as well as the marriage of Prince Harry
and actress Meghan Markle.
In 2022, she celebrated her platinum jubilee,
marking 70 years on the British throne.
That year, she became the second longest living monarch
in history behind King Louis XIV of France,
who had ruled for 72 years.
By this time, though, the queen was a visibly much frailer
and soon passed public appearances
and engagements over to her son Charles.
On the 8th of September, the queen fell ill
and her family rushed from all over the globe
to be by her side.
She died peacefully at 15:10 British Standard Time
at Balmoral Castle in 2022, age 96.
Her reign spanned an immensely transformative period
of not just royal history, but world history.
The crown had undoubtedly fallen in power,
but the queen in her conduct ensured
that it held onto its prestige.
She was a well-respected stateswoman, and during her reign,
her popularity remains steadily positive
despite moments of tension and drama.
She made the transition into the technological age
with all its trappings seamlessly and with grace,
modernized the role of the monarch for the 21st century,
and earned the respect of people all over the globe.
Her death was widely mourned
and attended by 500 heads of state.
In her wake, the British throne
was left to her son, Charles.
(light music)
Crowned on the 6th of May, 2023,
King Charles III is the latest in a long line
to sit on the British throne.
He has been an active member
of the royal family since his youth,
speaking out in support of climate change, royal reforms,
and sustainable farming since the 1960s.
He is high profile, and bitter divorce from Diana Spencer
made the prince a polarizing
and at times unpopular figure in the kingdom.
His subsequent marriage to Camilla Parker Bowles
a year after the death of Diana
drew widespread public scrutiny,
but his reputation held on
and he has since become an outspoken advocate
for environmentalism, historical conservation,
and a reduction in size of the British monarchy.
While with Diana, he had two sons, Prince William,
heir to the British throne, and Prince Harry.
He has maintained a close relationship to both boys.
However, after the marriage of Harry and Meghan in 2018
and the subsequent fallout between Harry
and the royal institution,
the pair have been increasingly estranged.
Ascending to the throne at 73 years of age,
King Charles III became the oldest person
to be crown king of Britain,
and his coronation took place at Westminster Abbey,
as customs still dictates.
Only time will tell
how the reign of Charles III will pan out.
Despite his age, the kingdom is undergoing immense change
both politically and socially.
And if his predecessors' long lives or anything to go by,
Charles should sit for a good while still.
Britain has now officially separated
from the European Union,
migration to the island remains higher than ever before,
and the country is suffering
through some of the worst recessions in its history,
putting untold strain on the national health service
and welfare systems.
The Conservative Party have enjoyed over a decade
of uninterrupted rule,
and social tension calling for government reform
grows louder every year.
This is the kingdom Charles has inherited.
By comparison, he is a very modern king.
He understands that the role of the monarchy
must continue to change, or else, risk being left behind.
It remains to be seen, will he rise to the challenge,
or could King Charles III be the last king of Great Britain?